AVUL PAKIR JAINULABDEEN ABDUL KALAM has
come to personally represent to many of his countrymen the
best aspects of Indian life. Born in 1931, the son of a little
educated boatowner in Rameswaram, Tamilnadu, he had
an unparalleled career as a defence scientist, culminating
in the highest civilian award of India, the Bharat Ratna.
As chief of the country's defence research and
development programme, Kalam demonstrated the great
potential for dynamism and innovation that existed in
seemingly moribund research establishments. This is the
story of Kalam's rise from obscurity and his personal and
professional struggles, as well as the story of Agni, Prithvi,
Akash, Trishul and Nag - missiles that have become
household names in India and that have raised the nation to
the level of a missile power of international recokoning.
At the same time as he has helped create India's
awesome weaponry, Kalam has maintained the ascetic
rigour of his personal life, working 18 hours a day and
practicing the veena. With characteristic modesty, Kalam
ascribes the greatness of his achievement to the influence
of his teachers and mentors. He describes the struggles of
his boyhood and youth, bringing alive everyday life in a
small town in South India and the inspirational role of
educators. He describes the role of visionary Indian
scientists, such as Dr Vikram Sarabhai, and of the creation
of a coordinated network of research institutions. This is
also the saga of independent India's struggle for
technological self sufficiency and defensive autonomy - a
story as much about politics, domestic and international, as
it is about science.
Arun Tiwari worked under Dr APJ Abdul Kalam for
over a decade in the Defence Research and Development
Laboratory (DRDL), Hyderabad. He is currently Director,
Cardiovascular Technology Institute, Hyderabad, where he
is pursuing Dr Kalam's vision of developing cost-effective
medical devices using indigenous defence technology.
Dr Kalam is now India's President. He was elected to
India's office by a huge majority in 2002.
To the memory of my parents
Sea waves, golden sand, pilgrims' faith,
Rameswaram Mosque Street, all merge into one,
You come to me like heaven's caring arms.
I remember the war days when life was challenge and toil -
Miles to walk, hours before sunrise,
Walking to take lessons from the saintly teacher near the
temple. Again miles to the Arab teaching school,
Climb sandy hills to Railway Station Road,
Collect, distribute newspapers to temple city citizens,
Few hours after sunrise, going to school.
Evening, business time before study at night.
All this pain of a young boy,
My Mother you transformed into pious strength
With kneeling and bowing five times
For the Grace of the Almighty only, My Mother.
Your strong piety is your children's strength,
You always shared your best with whoever needed the
most, You always gave, and gave with faith in Him.
I still remember the day when I was ten,
Sleeping on your lap to the envy of my elder brothers and
sisters It was full moon night, my world only you knew
When at midnight I woke with tears falling on my knee You
knew the pain of your child, My Mother.
Your caring hands, tenderly removing the pain
Your love, your care, your faith gave me strength
To face the world without fear and with His strength.
We will meet again on the great Judgement Day, My
have worked under Dr APJ Abdul Kalam for over a
decade. This might seem to disqualify me as his
biographer, and I certainly had no notion of being one. One
day, while speaking to him, I
asked him if he had a message for young Indians. His
message fascinated me. Later, I mustered the courage to
ask him about his recollections so that I could pen them
down before they were buried irretrievably under the sands
We had a long series of sittings late into the night and
early under the fading stars of dawn - all somehow stolen
from his very busy schedule of eighteen hours a day. The
profundity and range of his ideas mesmerized me. He had
tremendous vitality and obviously received immense
pleasure from the world of ideas. His conversation was not
always easy to follow, but was always fresh and stimulating.
There were complexities, subtleties, and intriguing
metaphors and subplots in his narrative, but gradually the
unfolding of his brilliant mind took the form of a continuous
When I sat down to write this book, I felt that it required
greater skills than I possessed. But realising the
importance of this task and regarding it an honour to have
been permitted to attempt it, I prayed earnestly for the
courage and calibre to complete it.
This book is written for the ordinary people of India for
whom Dr Kalam has an immense affection, and of whom
Dr Kalam is certainly one. He has an intuitive rapport with
the humblest and simplest people, an indication of his own
simplicity and innate spirituality.
For myself, writing this book has been like a pilgrimage.
Through Dr Kalam, I was blessed with the revelation that
the real joy of living can be found in only one way - in one's
communion with an eternal source of hidden knowledge
within oneself - which each individual is bidden to seek and
find for himself or herself. Many of you may never meet Dr
Kalam in person, but I hope you will enjoy his company
through this book, and that he will become your spiritual
I could include in this book only a few incidents among
the many narrated to me by Dr Kalam. In fact, this book
provides only a thumbnail sketch of Dr Kalam's life. It is
quite possible that certain important incidents have been
inadvertently dropped and that the contribution of some
individuals to the projects co-ordinated by Dr Kalam has
gone unrecorded. Since a quarter-century of professional
life separates me from Dr Kalam, some important issues
might also have remained unrecorded or have been
distorted. I am solely responsible for such shortcomings,
which are, of course, completely unintentional.
wish to express my gratitude to all the people involved
in the writing of this book, especially Mr YS Rajan, Mr A
Sivathanu Pillai, Mr RN Agarwal, Mr Prahlada, Mr KVSS
and Dr SK Salwan, who were very generous in sharing their
time and knowledge with me.
I am thankful to Prof. KAV Pandalai and Mr R
Swaminathan, for critical reviews of the text. I thank Dr B
Soma Raju for his tangible, but always unspoken support,
for this project. My sincere thanks go to my wife and
unsparing critic, Dr Anjana Tiwari, for her tough comments,
accompanied with her gentle support.
It has been a pleasure to work with Universities Press, and
the cooperation of the editorial and production staff is much
There are many fine people, such as the photographer
Mr. Prabhu, who have selflessly enriched me and this book
in ways beyond measure. I thank them all.
And finally, my deepest gratitude to my sons, Aseem
and Amol - for their unfailing emotional support during the
writing, and because I seek in them that attitude towards
life which Dr Kalam admired, and wanted this work to
This book is being released at a time when India's
technological endeavours, to assert its sovereignty and
strengthen its security, are questioned by many in the world.
Historically, people have always fought among themselves
on one issue or another. Prehistorically, battles were fought
over food and shelter. With the passage of time, wars were
waged over religious and ideological beliefs; and now the
dominant struggle of sophisticated warfare is for economic
and technological supremacy. Consequently, economic
and technological supremacy is equated with political
power and world control.
Afew nations who have grown very strong
technologically, over the past few centuries, have wrested
control, for their own purposes. These major powers have
become the self-proclaimed leaders of the new world
order. What does a country of one billion people, like India,
do in such a situation? We have no other option but to be
technologically strong. But, can India be a leader in the field
of technology? My answer is an emphatic 'Yes'. And let me
validate my answer by narrating some incidents from my
When I first began the reminiscences that have gone
into this book, I was uncertain about which of my memories
were worth narrating or were of any relevance at all. My
childhood is precious to me, but would it be of interest to
anyone else? Was it worth the reader's while, I wondered,
to know about the tribulations and triumphs of a smalltown
boy? Of the straitened circumstances of my schooldays, the
odd jobs I did to pay my school fees, and how my decision
to become a vegetarian was partly due to my financial
to become a vegetarian was partly due to my financial
constraints as a college student - why should these be of
any interest to the general public? In the end, I was
convinced that these were relevant, if not for anything else
but because they tell something of the story of modern
India, as individual destiny and the social matrix in which it
is embedded cannot be seen in isolation. Having been
persuaded of this, it did seem germane to include the
accounts of my frustrated attempt to become an Air Force
pilot and of how I became, instead of the Collector my
father dreamed I would be, a rocket engineer.
Finally, I decided to describe the individuals who had a
profound influence on my life. This book is also by way of a
submission of thanks, therefore, to my parents and
immediate family, and to the teachers and preceptors I was
fortunate to have had, both as a student and in my
professional life. It is also a tribute to the unflagging
enthusiasm and efforts of my young colleagues who helped
to realise our collective dreams. The famous words of Isaac
Newton about standing on the shoulders of giants are valid
for every scientist and I certainly owe a great debt of
knowledge and inspiration to the distinguished lineage of
Indian scientists, that included Vikram Sarabhai, Satish
Dhawan and Brahm Prakash. They played major roles in
my life and in the story of Indian science.
I completed sixty years of age on 15 October 1991. I had
decided to devote my retirement to fulfilling what I saw as
my duties in the
sphere of social service. Instead, two things happened
simultaneously. First, I agreed to continue in government
service for another three years and, next, a young
colleague, Arun Tiwari, requested me to share my
reminiscences with him, so that he could record them. He
was someone who had been working in my laboratory
since 1982, but I had never really known him well until the
February of 1987 when I visited him at the Intensive
Coronary Care Unit of the Nizam's Institute of Medical
Sciences in Hyderabad. He was a mere 32 years old, but
was fighting valiantly for his life. I asked him if there was
anything he wanted me to do for him. "Give me your
blessings, sir," he said, "so that I may have a longer life and
can complete at least one of your projects."
The young man's dedication moved me and I prayed for
his recovery all night. The Lord answered my prayers and
Tiwari was able to get back to work in a month. He did an
excellent job in helping to realise the Akash missile
airframe from scratch within the short space of three years.
He then took up the task of chronicling my story. Over the
last year, he patiently transcribed the bits and pieces of my
story and converted them into a fluent narrative. He also
went through my personal library meticulously and selected
from among the pieces of poetry those that I had marked
while reading, and included them in the text.
This story is an account, I hope, not just of my personal
triumphs and tribulations but of the successes and
setbacks of the science establishment in modern India,
struggling to establish itself in the technological forefront. It
is the story of national aspiration and of cooperative
endeavour. And, as I see it, the saga of India's search for
scientific self-sufficiency and technological competence is
a parable for our times.
Each individual creature on this beautiful planet is
created by God to fulfil a particular role. Whatever I have
achieved in life is through His help, and an expression of
His will. He showered His grace on me through some
outstanding teachers and colleagues, and when I pay my
tributes to these fine persons, I am merely praising His
glory. All these rockets and missiles are His work through a
small person called Kalam, in order to tell the several-
million mass of India, to never feel small or helpless. We
are all born with a divine fire in us. Our efforts should be to
give wings to this fire and fill the world with the glow of its
May God bless you!
[ 1931 - 1963 ]
This earth is His, to Him belong those vast and boundless
skies;Both seas within Him rest, and yet in that small pool
ATHARVAVEDA Book 4, Hymn 16.

was born into a middle-class Tamil family in the island
town of Rameswaram in the erstwhile Madras state. My
father, Jainulabdeen, had neither much formal education
despite these disadvantages, he possessed great
innate wisdom and a true generosity of spirit. He had an
ideal helpmate in my mother, Ashiamma. I do not recall the
exact number of people she fed every day, but I am quite
certain that far more outsiders ate with us than all the
members of our own family put together.
My parents were widely regarded as an ideal couple.
My mother's lineage was the more distinguished, one of
her forebears having been bestowed the title of 'Bahadur'
I was one of many children - a short boy with rather
undistinguished looks, born to tall and handsome parents.
We lived in our ancestral house, which was built in the
middle of the 19th century. It was a fairly large pucca house,
made of limestone and brick, on the Mosque Street in
Rameswaram. My austere father used to avoid all
inessential comforts and luxuries. However, all necessities
were provided for, in terms of food, medicine or clothes. In
fact, I would say mine was a very secure childhood, both
I normally ate with my mother, sitting on the floor of the
kitchen. She would place a banana leaf before me, on
which she then ladled rice and aromatic sambhar, a variety
of sharp, home-made pickles and a dollop of fresh coconut
The famous Shiva temple, which made Rameswaram
so sacred to pilgrims, was about a ten-minute walk from
our house. Our locality was predominantly Muslim, but there
were quite a few Hindu families too, living amicably with
their Muslim neighbours. There was a very old mosque in
our locality where my father would take me for evening
prayers. I had not the faintest idea of the meaning of the
Arabic prayers chanted, but I was totally convinced that they
reached God. When my father came out of the mosque
after the prayers, people of different religions would be
sitting outside, waiting for him. Many of them offered bowls
of water to my father who would dip his fingertips in them
and say a prayer. This water was then carried home for
invalids. I also remember people visiting our home to offer
thanks after being cured. My father always smiled and
asked them to thank Allah, the benevolent and merciful.
The high priest of Rameswaram temple, Pakshi
Lakshmana Sastry, was a very close friend of my father's.
One of the most vivid memories of my early childhood is of
the two men, each in his traditional attire, discussing
spiritual matters. When I was old enough to ask questions, I
asked my father about the relevance of prayer. My father
told me there was nothing mysterious about prayer. Rather,
prayer made possible a communion of the spirit between
people. "When you pray," he said, "you transcend your body
and become a part of the cosmos, which knows no division
of wealth, age, caste, or creed."
My father could convey complex spiritual concepts in
very simple, downto-earth Tamil. He once told me, "In his
own time, in his own place, in what he really is, and in the
stage he has reached - good or bad - every human being
is a specific element within the whole of the manifest divine
Being. So why be afraid of difficulties, sufferings and
problems? When troubles come, try to understand the
relevance of your sufferings. Adversity always presents
"Why don't you say this to the people who come to you
for help and advice?" I asked my father. He put his hands
on my shoulders and looked straight into my eyes. For quite
some time he said nothing, as if he was judging my
capacity to comprehend his words. Then he answered in a
low, deep voice. His answer filled me with a strange energy
Whenever human beings find themselves alone, as a
natural reaction, they start looking for company. Whenever
they are in trouble, they look for someone to help them.
Whenever they reach an impasse, they look to someone to
show them the way out. Every recurrent anguish, longing,
and desire finds its own special helper. For the people who
come to me in distress, I am but a go-between in their effort
to propitiate demonic forces with prayers and offerings.
This is not a correct approach at all and should never be
followed. One must understand the difference between a
fear-ridden vision of destiny and the vision that enables us
to seek the enemy of fulfilment within ourselves.
I remember my father starting his day at 4 a.m. by
reading the namaz before dawn. After the namaz, he used
to walk down to a small coconut grove we owned, about 4
miles from our home. He would return, with about a dozen
coconuts tied together thrown over his shoulder, and only
then would he have his breakfast. This remained his routine
even when he was in his late sixties.
I have throughout my life tried to emulate my father in my
own world of science and technology. I have endeavoured
to understand the fundamental truths revealed to me by my
father, and feel convinced that there exists a divine power
that can lift one up from confusion, misery, melancholy and
failure, and guide one to one's true place. And once an
individual severs his emotional and physical bondage, he is
on the road to freedom, happiness and peace of mind.
I was about six years old when my father embarked on
the project of building a wooden sailboat to take pilgrims
from Rameswaram to Dhanuskodi, (also called
Sethukkarai), and back. He worked at building the boat on
the seashore, with the help of a relative, Ahmed Jallaluddin,
who later married my sister, Zohara. I watched the boat
take shape. The wooden hull and bulkheads were
seasoned with the heat from wood fires. My father was
doing good business with the boat when, one day, a
cyclone bringing winds of over 100 miles per hour carried
away our boat, along with some of the landmass of
Sethukkarai. The Pamban Bridge collapsed with a train full
of passengers on it. Until then, I had only seen the beauty of
the sea, now its uncontrollable energy came as a revelation
By the time the boat met its untimely end, Ahmed
Jallaluddin had become a close friend of mine, despite the
difference in our ages. He was about 15 years older than I
and used to call me Azad. We used to go for long walks
together every evening. As we started from Mosque Street
and made our way towards the sandy shores of the island,
Jallaluddin and I talked mainly of spiritual matters. The
atmosphere of Rameswaram, with its flocking pilgrims, was
conducive to such discussion. Our first halt would be at the
imposing temple of Lord Shiva. Circling around the temple
with the same reverence as any pilgrim from a distant part
of the country, we felt a flow of energy pass through us.
Jallaluddin would talk about God as if he had a working
partnership with Him. He would present all his doubts to
God as if He were standing nearby to dispose of them. I
would stare at Jallaluddin and then look towards the large
groups of pilgrims around the temple, taking holy dips in the
sea, performing rituals and reciting prayers with a sense of
respect towards the same Unknown, whom we treat as the
formless Almighty. I never doubted that the prayers in the
temple reached the same destination as the ones offered
in our mosque. I only wondered whether Jallaluddin had any
other special connection to God. Jallaluddin's schooling
had been limited, principally because of his family's
straitened circumstances. This may have been the reason
why he always encouraged me to excel in my studies and
enjoyed my success vicariously. Never did I find the
slightest trace of resentment in Jallaluddin for his
deprivation. Rather, he was always full of gratitude for
whatever life had chosen to give him.
Incidentally, at the time I speak of, he was the only
person on the entire island who could write English. He
wrote letters for almost anybody in need, be they letters of
application or otherwise. Nobody of my acquaintance,
either in my family or in the neighbourhood even had
Jallaluddin's level of education or any links of consequence
with the outside world. Jallaluddin always spoke to me
about educated people, of scientific discoveries, of
contemporary literature, and of the achievements of
medical science. It was he who made me aware of a
"brave, new world" beyond our narrow confines.
In the humble environs of my boyhood, books were a
scarce commodity. By local standards, however, the
personal library of STR Manickam, a former 'revolutionary'
or militant nationalist, was sizeable. He encouraged me to
read all I could and I often visited his home to borrow
Another person who greatly influenced my boyhood was
my first cousin, Samsuddin. He was the sole distributor for
newspapers in Rameswaram. The newspapers would
arrive at Rameswaram station by the morning train from
Pamban. Samsuddin's newspaper agency was a one-man
organization catering to the reading demands of the 1,000-
strong literate population of Rameswaram town. These
newspapers were mainly bought to keep abreast of current
developments in the National Independence Movement, for
astrological reference or to check the bullion rates
prevailing in Madras. A few readers with a more
cosmopolitan outlook would discuss Hitler, Mahatma
Gandhi and Jinnah; almost all would finally flow into the
mighty political current of Periyar EV Ramaswamy's
movement against high caste Hindus. Dinamani was the
most sought after newspaper. Since reading the printed
matter was beyond my capability, I had to satisfy myself
with glancing at the pictures in the newspaper before
Samsuddin delivered them to his customers.
The Second World War broke out in 1939, when I was
eight years old. For reasons I have never been able to
understand, a sudden demand for tamarind seeds erupted
in the market. I used to collect the seeds and sell them to a
provision shop on Mosque Street. A day's collection would
fetch me the princely sum of one anna. Jallaluddin would tell
me stories about the war which I would later attempt to
trace in the headlines in Dinamani. Our area, being
isolated, was completely unaffected by the war. But soon
India was forced to join the Allied Forces and something
like a state of emergency was declared. The first casualty
came in the form of the suspension of the train halt at
Rameswaram station. The newspapers now had to be
bundled and thrown out from the moving train on the
Rameswaram Road between Rameswaram and
Dhanuskodi. That forced Samsuddin to look for a helping
hand to catch the bundles and, as if naturally, I filled the slot.
Samsuddin helped me earn my first wages. Half a century
later, I can still feel the surge of pride in earning my own
money for the first time.
Every child is born, with some inherited characteristics,
into a specific socio-economic and emotional environment,
and trained in certain ways by figures of authority. I
inherited honesty and self-discipline from my father; from
my mother, I inherited faith in goodness and deep kindness
and so did my three brothers and sister. But it was the time
I spent with Jallaluddin and Samsuddin that perhaps
contributed most to the uniqueness of my childhood and
made all the difference in my later life. The unschooled
wisdom of Jallaluddin and Samsuddin was so intuitive and
responsive to non-verbal messages, that I can
unhesitatingly attribute my subsequently manifested
creativity to their company in my childhood.
I had three close friends in my childhood - Ramanadha
Sastry, Aravindan, and Sivaprakasan. All these boys were
from orthodox Hindu Brahmin families. As children, none of
us ever felt any difference amongst ourselves because of
our religious differences and upbringing. In fact,
Ramanadha Sastry was the son of Pakshi Lakshmana
Sastry, the high priest of the Rameswaram temple. Later,
he took over the priesthood of the Rameswaram temple
from his father; Aravindan went into the business of
arranging transport for visiting pilgrims; and Sivaprakasan
became a catering contractor for the Southern Railways.
During the annual Shri Sita Rama Kalyanam ceremony,
our family used to arrange boats with a special platform for
carrying idols of the Lord from the temple to the marriage
site, situated in the middle of the pond called Rama Tirtha
which was near our house. Events from the Ramayana and
from the life of the Prophet were the bedtime stories my
mother and grandmother would tell the children in our
One day when I was in the fifth standard at the
Rameswaram Elementary School, a new teacher came to
our class. I used to wear a cap which marked me as a
Muslim, and I always sat in the front row next to Ramanadha
Sastry, who wore a sacred thread. The new teacher could
not stomach a Hindu priest's son sitting with a Muslim boy.
In accordance with our social ranking as the new teacher
saw it, I was asked to go and sit on the back bench. I felt
very sad, and so did Ramanadha Sastry. He looked utterly
downcast as I shifted to my seat in the last row. The image
of him weeping when I shifted to the last row left a lasting
After school, we went home and told our respective
parents about the incident. Lakshmana Sastry summoned
the teacher, and in our presence, told the teacher that he
should not spread the poison of social inequality and
communal intolerance in the minds of innocent children. He
bluntly asked the teacher to either apologize or quit the
school and the island. Not only did the teacher regret his
behaviour, but the strong sense of conviction Lakshmana
Sastry conveyed ultimately reformed this young teacher.
On the whole, the small society of Rameswaram was
highly stratified and very rigid in terms of the segregation of
different social groups. However, my science teacher
Sivasubramania Iyer, though an orthodox Brahmin with a
very conservative wife, was something of a rebel. He did
his best to break social barriers so that people from varying
backgrounds could mingle easily. He used to spend hours
with me and would say, "Kalam, I want you to develop so
that you are on par with the highly educated people of the
One day, he invited me to his home for a meal. His wife
was horrified at the idea of a Muslim boy being invited to
dine in her ritually pure kitchen. She refused to serve me in
her kitchen. Sivasubramania Iyer was not perturbed, nor did
he get angry with his wife, but instead, served me with his
own hands and sat down beside me to eat his meal. His
wife watched us from behind the kitchen door. I wondered
whether she had observed any difference in the way I ate
rice, drank water or cleaned the floor after the meal. When I
was leaving his house, Sivasubramania Iyer invited me to
join him for dinner again the next weekend. Observing my
hesitation, he told me not to get upset, saying, "Once you
decide to change the system, such problems have to be
confronted." When I visited his house the next week,
Sivasubramania Iyer's wife took me inside her kitchen and
served me food with her own hands.
Then the Second World War was over and India's
freedom was imminent. "Indians will build their own India,"
declared Gandhiji. The whole country was filled with an
unprecedented optimism. I asked my father's permission to
leave Rameswaram and study at the district headquarters
He told me as if thinking aloud, "Abul! I know you have
to go away to grow. Does the seagull not fly across the Sun,
alone and without a nest? You must forego your longing for
the land of your memories to move into the dwelling place
of your greater desires; our love will not bind you nor will our
needs hold you." He quoted Khalil Gibran to my hesitant
mother, "Your children are not your children. They are the
sons and daughters of Life's longing for itself. They come
through you but not from you. You may give them your love
but not your thoughts. For they have their own thoughts."
He took me and my three brothers to the mosque and
recited the prayer Al Fatiha from the Holy Qur'an. As he put
me on the train at Rameswaram station he said, "This
island may be housing your body but not your soul. Your
soul dwells in the house of tomorrow which none of us at
Rameswaram can visit, not even in our dreams. May God
bless you, my child!"
Samsuddin and Ahmed Jallaluddin travelled with me to
Ramanathapuram to enrol me in Schwartz High School,
and to arrange for my boarding there. Somehow, I did not
take to the new setting. The town of Ramanathapuram was
a thriving, factious town of some fifty thousand people, but
the coherence and harmony of Rameswaram was absent. I
missed my home and grabbed every opportunity to visit
Rameswaram. The pull of educational opportunities at
Ramanathapuram was not strong enough to nullify the
attraction of poli, a South Indian sweet my mother made. In
fact, she used to prepare twelve distinctly different varieties
of it, bringing out the flavour of every single ingredient used
in the best possible combinations.
Despite my homesickness, I was determined to come
to terms with the new environment because I knew my
father had invested great hopes in my success. My father
visualized me as a Collector in the making and I thought it
my duty to realise my father's dream, although I desperately
missed the familiarity, security and comforts of
Jallaluddin used to speak to me about the power of
positive thinking and I often recalled his words when I felt
homesick or dejected. I tried hard to do as he said, which
was to strive to control my thoughts and my mind and,
through these, to influence my destiny. Ironically, that
destiny did not lead me back to Rameswaram, but rather,
swept me farther away from the home of my childhood.

nce I settled down at the Schwartz High School,
Ramanathapuram, the enthusiastic fifteen-year-old within
me re-emerged. My teacher, Iyadurai Solomon, was an
guide for an eager young mind that was yet uncertain of
the possibilities and alternatives that lay before it. He made
his students feel very comfortable in class with his warm
and open-minded attitude. He used to say that a good
student could learn more from a bad teacher than a poor
student from even a skilled teacher.
During my stay at Ramanathapuram, my relationship
with him grew beyond that of teacher and pupil. In his
company, I learnt that one could exercise enormous
influence over the events of one's own life. Iyadurai
Solomon used to say, "To succeed in life and achieve
results, you must understand and master three mighty
forces - desire, belief, and expectation." Iyadurai Solomon,
who later became a Reverend, taught me that before
anything I wanted could happen, I had to desire it intensely
and be absolutely certain it would happen. To take an
example from my own life, I had been fascinated by the
mysteries of the sky and the flight of birds from early
childhood. I used to watch cranes and seagulls soar into
flight and longed to fly. Simple, provincial boy though I was, I
was convinced that one day I, too, would soar up into the
skies. Indeed, I was the first child from Rameswaram to fly.
Iyadurai Solomon was a great teacher because he
instilled in all the children a sense of their own worth.
Solomon raised my self-esteem to a high point and
convinced me, the son of parents who had not had the
benefits of education, that I too could aspire to become
whatever I wished. "With faith, you can change your
destiny," he would say.
One day, when I was in the fourth form, my mathematics
teacher, Ramakrishna Iyer, was teaching another class.
Inadvertently, I wandered into that classroom and in the
manner of an old-fashioned despot, Ramakrishna Iyer
caught me by the neck and caned me in front of the whole
class. Many months later, when I scored full marks in
mathematics, he narrated the incident to the entire school
at morning assembly. "Whomsoever I cane becomes a
great man! Take my word, this boy is going to bring glory to
his school and to his teachers." His praise quite made up
for the earlier humiliation!
By the time I completed my education at Schwartz, I was
a selfconfident boy determined to succeed. The decision to
go in for further education was taken without a second
thought. To us, in those days, the awareness of the
possibilities for a professional education did not exist;
higher education simply meant going to college. The
nearest college was at Tiruchchirappalli, spelled
Trichinopoly those days, and called Trichi for short.
In 1950, I arrived at St. Joseph's College, Trichi, to
study for the Intermediate examination. I was not a bright
student in terms of examination grades but, thanks to my
two buddies back in Rameswaram, I had acquired a
practical bent of mind.
Whenever I returned to Rameswaram from Schwartz,
my elder brother Mustafa Kamal, who ran a provision store
on the railway station road, would call me in to give him a
little help and then vanish for hours together leaving the
shop in my charge. I sold oil, onions, rice and everything
else. The fastest moving items, I found, were cigarettes and
bidis. I used to wonder what made poor people smoke
away their hardearned money. When spared by Mustafa, I
would be put in charge of his kiosk by my younger brother,
Kasim Mohammed. There I sold novelties made of
At St. Joseph's, I was lucky to find a teacher like the
Rev. Father TN Sequeira. He taught us English and was
also our hostel warden. We were about a hundred boys
living in the three-storeyed hostel building. Rev. Father
used to visit each boy every night with a Bible in his hand.
His energy and patience was amazing. He was a very
considerate person who took care of even the most minute
requirements of his students. On Deepavali, on his
instructions, the Brother in charge of the hostel and the
mess volunteers would visit each room and distribute good
gingelly oil for the ritual bath.
I stayed on the St. Joseph's campus for four years and
shared my room with two others. One was an orthodox
Iyengar from Srirangam and the other a Syrian Christian
from Kerala. The three of us had a wonderful time together.
When I was made secretary of the vegetarian mess during
my third year in the hostel, we invited the Rector, Rev.
Father Kalathil, over for lunch one Sunday. Our menu
included the choicest preparations from our diverse
backgrounds. The result was rather unexpected, but Rev.
Father was lavish in his praise of our efforts. We enjoyed
every moment with Rev. Father Kalathil, who participated in
our unsophisticated conversation with childlike enthusiasm.
It was a memorable event for us all.
My teachers at St. Joseph were the true followers of
Kanchi Paramacharya, who evoked people to "enjoy the
action of giving". The vivid memory of our mathematics
teachers, Prof. Thothathri Iyengar and Prof. Suryanarayana
Sastry, walking together on the campus inspires me to this
When I was in the final year at St. Joseph's, I acquired a
taste for English literature. I began to read the great
classics, Tolstoy, Scott and Hardy being special favourites
despite their exotic settings, and then I moved on to some
works in Philosophy. It was around this time that I
developed a great interest in Physics.
The lessons on subatomic physics at St. Joseph's by
my physics teachers, Prof. Chinna Durai and Prof.
Krishnamurthy, introduced me to the concept of the half-life
period and matters related to the radioactive decay of
substances. Sivasubramania Iyer, my science teacher at
Rameswaram, had never taught me that most subatomic
particles are unstable and that they disintegrate after a
certain time into other particles. All this I was learning for
the first time. But when he taught me to strive with diligence
because decay is inherent in all compounded things, was
he not talking of the same thing? I wonder why some
people tend to see science as something which takes man
away from God. As I look at it, the path of science can
always wind through the heart. For me, science has always
been the path to spiritual enrichment and self-realisation.
Even the rational thought-matrices of science have
been home to fairy tales. I am an avid reader of books on
cosmology and enjoy reading about celestial bodies. Many
friends, while asking me questions related to space flights,
sometimes slip into astrology. Quite honestly, I have never
really understood the reason behind the great importance
attached by people to the faraway planets in our solar
system. As an art, I have nothing against astrology, but if it
seeks acceptance under the guise of science, I reject it. I
do not know how these myths evolved about planets, star
constellations, and even satellites - that they can exercise
power on human beings. The highly complicated
calculations manipulated around the precise movements of
celestial bodies, to derive highly subjective conclusions
appear illogical to me. As I see it, the Earth is the most
powerful and energetic planet. As John Milton puts it so
beautifully in Paradise Lost, Book VIII:
. . . What if the Sun
Be centre to the World, and other stars . . . . .
The planet earth, so steadfast though she seem,
In sensibly three different motions move?
Wherever you go on this planet, there is movement and
life. Even apparently inanimate things like rocks, metal,
timber, clay are full of intrinsic movement - with electrons
dancing around each nucleus. This motion originates in
their response to the confinement imposed on them by the
nucleus, by means of electric forces which try to hold them
as close as possible. Electrons, just like any individual with
a certain amount of energy, detest confinement. The tighter
the electrons are held by the nucleus, the higher their orbital
velocity will be: in fact, the confinement of electrons in an
atom results in enormous velocities of about 1000 km per
second! These high velocities make the atom appear a
rigid sphere, just as a fast-moving fan appears like a disc. It
is very difficult to compress atoms more strongly - thus
giving matter its familiar solid aspect. Everything solid,
thus, contains much empty space within and everything
stationary contains great movement within. It is as though
the great dance of Shiva is being performed on earth
during every moment of our existence.
When I joined the B.Sc. degree course at St.Joseph's, I
was unaware of any other option for higher education. Nor
did I have any information about career opportunities
available to a student of science. Only after obtaining a
B.Sc. did I realise that physics was not my subject. I had to
go into engineering to realise my dreams. I could have
joined the Engineering course long ago, right after finishing
my Intermediate course. Better late than never, I told myself
as I made the detour, applying for admission into the
Madras Institute of Technology (MIT), regarded as the
crown jewel of technical education in South India at that
I managed to be on the list of selected candidates, but
admission to this prestigious institution was an expensive
affair. Around a thousand rupees was required, and my
father could not spare that much money. At that time, my
sister, Zohara, stood behind me, mortgaging her gold
bangles and chain. I was deeply touched by her
determination to see me educated and by her faith in my
abilities. I vowed to release her bangles from mortgage
with my own earnings. The only way before me to earn
money at that point of time was to study hard and get a
scholarship. I went ahead at full steam.
What fascinated me most at MIT was the sight of two
decommissioned aircraft displayed there for the
demonstration of the various subsystems of flying
machines. I felt a strange attraction towards them, and
would sit near them long after other students had gone
back to the hostel, admiring man's will to fly free in the sky,
like a bird. After completing my first year, when I had to opt
for a specific branch, I almost spontaneously chose
aeronautical engineering. The goal was very clear in my
mind now; I was going to fly aircraft. I was convinced of this,
despite being aware of my lack of assertiveness, which
probably came about because of my humble background.
Around this time, I made special efforts to try and
communicate with different kinds of people. There were
setbacks, disappointments and distractions, but my father's
inspiring words anchored me in those periods of nebulous
Plate 1 (a) My father Jainulabdeen was not formally
educated, but was a man of great wisdom and
kindness. (b) Pakshi Lakshmana Sastry, a close
friend of my father and the head priest of the

Plate 2 The locality in which I grew up: (a) My
house on Mosque Street. (b) Thousands of pilgrims
from great distances descend on the ancient temple
of Lord Shiva. I often assisted my brother Kasim
Mohamed in his shop selling artifacts on this street.
Plate 3 The old mosque in our locality where my
father would take me and my brothers every evening
Plate 4 My brother pointing at the T-square I used
Plate 5 STR Manickam (inset), a friend of my
brother Mustafa Kamal, had a large collection of
books. This is his house, from where I would borrow
books while at Rameswaram.
Plate 6 A family get-together.
Plate 7 The simple surroundings of Schwartz High
School, Ramanathapuram. The words on the plaque
read "Let not thy winged days be spent in vain. When
once gone no gold can buy them back again."
Plate 8 My teachers at Schwartz High School -
Iyadurai Solomon (standing, left) and Ramakrishna
Iyer (sitting, right). They are the best examples of
small-town Indian teachers committed to nurturing
"He who knows others is learned, but the wise one is the
one who knows himself. Learning without wisdom is of no
In the course of my education at MIT, three teachers
shaped my thinking. Their combined contributions formed
the foundation on which I later built my professional career.
These three teachers were Prof. Sponder, Prof. KAV
Pandalai and Prof. Narasingha Rao. Each one of them had
very distinct personalities, but they shared a common
impulse - the capacity to feed their students' intellectual
hunger by sheer brilliance and untiring zeal.
Prof. Sponder taught me technical aerodynamics. He
was an Austrian with rich practical experience in
aeronautical engineering. During the Second World War,
he had been captured by the Nazis and imprisoned in a
concentration camp. Understandably, he had developed a
very strong dislike for Germans. Inciden- tally, the
aeronautical department was headed by a German, Prof.
Walter Repenthin. Another well-known professor, Dr Kurt
Tank, was a distinguished aeronautical engineer who had
designed the German Focke-Wulf FW 190 single-seater
fighter plane, an outstanding combat aircraft of the Second
World War. Dr Tank later joined the Hindustan Aeronautics
Limited (HAL) in Bangalore and was responsible for the
design of India's first jet fighter, the HF-24 Marut.
Notwithstanding these irritants, Prof. Sponder
preserved his individuality and maintained high
professional standards. He was always calm, energetic
and in total control of himself. He kept abreast of the latest
technologies and expected his students to do the same. I
consulted him before opting for aeronautical engineering.
He told me that one should never worry about one's future
prospects: instead, it was more important to lay sound
foundations, to have sufficient enthusiasm and an
accompanying passion for one's chosen field of study. The
trouble with Indians, Prof. Sponder used to observe, was
not that they lacked educational opportunities or industrial
infrastructure - the trouble was in their failure to
discriminate between disciplines and to rationalise their
choices. Why aeronautics? Why not electrical engineering?
Why not mechanical engineering? I myself would like to tell
all novitiate engineering students that when they choose
their specialization, the essential point to consider is
whether the choice articulates their inner feelings and
Prof. KAV Pandalai taught me aero-structure design
and analysis. He was a cheerful, friendly and enthusiastic
teacher, who brought a fresh approach to every year's
teaching course. It was Professor Pandalai who opened up
the secrets of structural engineering to us. Even today I
believe that everyone who has been taught by Prof.
Pandalai would agree that he was a man of great
intellectual integrity and scholarship - but with no trace of
arrogance. His students were free to disagree with him on
several points in the classroom.
Prof. Narasingha Rao was a mathematician, who taught
us theoretical aerodynamics. I still remember his method of
teaching fluid dynamics. After attending his classes, I
began to prefer mathematical physics to any other subject.
Often, I have been told I carry a "surgical knife" to
aeronautical design reviews. If it had not been for Prof.
Rao's kind and persistent advice on picking up proofs to
equations of aerodynamic flow, I would not have acquired
Aeronautics is a fascinating subject, containing within it
the promise of freedom. The great difference between
freedom and escape, between motion and movement,
between slide and flow are the secrets of this science. My
teachers revealed these truths to me. Through their
meticulous teaching, they created within me an excitement
about aeronautics. Their intellectual fervour, clarity of
thought and passion for perfection helped me to launch into
a serious study of fluid dynamicsmodes of compressible
medium motion, development of shock waves and shock,
induced flow separation at increasing speeds, shock stall
Slowly, a great amalgamation of information took place
in my mind. The structural features of aeroplanes began to
gain new meanings - biplanes, monoplanes, tailless
planes, canard configured planes, deltawing planes, all
these began to assume increasing significance for me. The
three teachers, all of them authorities in their different fields,
helped me to mould a composite knowledge.
My third and last year at MIT was a year of transition
and was to have a great impact on my later life. In those
days, a new climate of political enlightenment and industrial
effort was sweeping across the country. I had to test my
belief in God and see if it could fit into the matrix of
scientific thinking. The accepted view was that a belief in
scientific methods was the only valid approach to
knowledge. If so, I wondered, was matter alone the ultimate
reality and were spiritual phenomena but a manifestation of
matter? Were all ethical values relative, and was sensory
perception the only source of knowledge and truth? I
wondered about these issues, attempting to sort out the
wondered about these issues, attempting to sort out the
vexing question of "scientific temper" and my own spiritual
interests. The value system in which I had been nurtured
was profoundly religious. I had been taught that true reality
lay beyond the material world in the spiritual realm, and that
knowledge could be obtained only through inner
Meanwhile, when I had finished my course work, I was
assigned a project to design a low-level attack aircraft
together with four other colleagues. I had taken up the
responsibility of preparing and drawing the aerodynamic
design. My team mates distributed among themselves the
tasks of designing the propulsion, structure, control and
instrumentation of the aircraft. One day, my design teacher,
Prof. Srinivasan, then the Director of the MIT, reviewed my
progress and declared it dismal and disappointing. I
offered a dozen excuses for the delay, but none of them
impressed Prof. Srinivasan. I finally pleaded for a month's
time to complete the task. The Professor looked at me for
some time and said, "Look, young man, today is Friday
afternoon. I give you three days' time. If by Monday morning
I don't get the configuration drawing, your scholarship will
be stopped." I was dumbstruck. The scholarship was my
lifeline and I would be quite helpless if it was withdrawn. I
could see no other way out but to finish the task as I had
been instructed. That night, I remained at the drawing
board, skipping dinner. Next morning, I took only an hour's
break to freshen up and eat a little food. On Sunday
morning, I was very near completion, when suddenly I felt
someone else's presence in the room. Prof. Srinivasan
was watching me from a distance. Coming straight from the
gymkhana, he was still in his tennis outfit and had dropped
in to see my progress. After examining my work, Prof.
Srinivasan hugged me affectionately and patted my back in
appreciation. He said, "I knew I was putting you under
stress and asking you to meet an impossible deadline. I
never expected you to perform so well."
During the rest of the period of the project, I participated
in an essay competition organized by the MIT Tamil
Sangam (Literary Society). Tamil is my mother tongue and I
am proud of its origins, which have been traced back to
Sage Agastya in the pre-Ramayana period; its literature
dates back to the fifth century BC. It is said to be a
language moulded by lawyers and grammarians and is
internationally acclaimed for its clear-cut logic. I was very
enthusiastic about ensuring that science did not remain
outside the purview of this wonderful language. I wrote an
article entitled "Let Us Make Our Own Aircraft" in Tamil. The
article evoked much interest and I won the competition,
taking the first prize from 'Devan', the editor of the popular
Tamil weekly, Ananda Vikatan.
My most touching memory of MIT is related to Prof.
Sponder. We were posing for a group photograph as part
of a farewell ritual. All the graduating students had lined up
in three rows with the professors seated in the front.
Suddenly, Prof. Sponder got up and looked for me. I was
standing in the third row. "Come and sit with me in the
front," he said. I was taken aback by Prof. Sponder's
invitation. "You are my best student and hard work will help
you bring a great name for your teachers in future."
Embarrassed by the praise but honoured by the
recognition, I sat with Prof. Sponder for the photograph.
"Let God be your hope, your stay, your guide and provide
the lantern for your feet in your journey into the future," said
the introverted genius, bidding me adieu.
From MIT, I went to Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
(HAL) at Bangalore as a trainee. There I worked on engine
overhauling as part of a team. Hands-on work on aircraft
engine overhauling was very educative. When a principle
learnt in the classroom is borne out by practical experience,
it creates a strange sense of excitement - akin to
unexpectedly running into an old friend among a crowd of
strangers. At HAL, I worked on the overhauling of both
piston and turbine engines. The hazy concepts of gas
dynamics and diffusion processes in the working principle
of after burning came into sharper focus in my mind. I was
also trained in radial engine-cum-drum operations.
I learned how to check a crankshaft for wear and tear,
and a connecting rod and crankshaft for twist. I did
calibrations of a fixedpitch fan fitted to a super-charged
engine. I opened up pressure and acceleration-cum-speed
control systems, and air starter supply systems of turbo-
engines. Getting to understand feathering, un-feathering
and reversing of propeller engines was very interesting.
The demonstration of the delicate art of beta (blade angle
control) by HAL technicians still lingers in my memory. They
had neither studied in major universities, nor were they
merely implementing what their engineer-in-charge was
suggesting. They had been working hands-on for years and
this had given them something like an intuitive feel for the
Two alternative opportunities for employment, both
close to my longstanding dream of flying, presented
themselves before me when I came out of HAL as a
graduate aeronautical engineer. One was a career in the
Air Force and another was a job at the Directorate of
Technical Development and Production, DTD&P(Air), at
the Ministry of Defence. I applied for both. The interview
calls arrived from both the places almost simultaneously. I
was asked to reach Dehra Dun by the Air Force
recruitment authorities and Delhi by DTD&P(Air). The boy
from the Coromandel Coast took a train to the North of
India. My destination was more than 2000 km away, and
was to be my first encounter with the vastness of my

hrough the window of the compartment, I watched the
countryside slip past. From a distance, the men in the fields
in their white dhotis and turbans, and the womenfolk in
splashes of colour against the green background of
paddy fields, seemed to inhabit some beautiful painting. I
sat glued to the window. Almost everywhere, people were
engaged in some activity which had a rhythm and
tranquillity about it - men driving cattle, women fetching
water from streams. Occasionally, a child would appear
and wave at the train.
It is astonishing how the landscape changes as one
moves northwards. The rich and fertile plains of the river
Ganga and its numerous tributaries have invited invasion,
turmoil, and change. Around 1500 BC, fair-skinned Aryans
swept in through the mountain passes from the far north-
west. The tenth century brought Muslims, who later mingled
with the local people and became an integral part of this
country. One empire gave way to another. Religious
conquests continued. All this time, the part of India south of
the Tropic of Cancer remained largely untouched, safe
behind the shield of the Vindhya and Satpura mountain
ranges. The Narmada, Tapti, Mahanadi, Godavari, and
Krishna rivers had woven a net of almost unassailable
protection for the tapering Indian peninsula. To bring me to
Delhi, my train had crossed all these geographical
impediments through the power of scientific advancement.
I halted for a week in Delhi, the city of the great Sufi
Saint Hazrat Nizamuddin, and appeared for the interview at
DTD&P(Air). I did well at the interview. The questions were
of a routine nature, and did not challenge my knowledge of
the subject. Then I proceeded to Dehra Dun for my
interview at the Air Force Selection Board. At the Selection
Board, the emphasis was more on "personality" than on
intelligence. Perhaps they were looking for physical fitness
and an articulate manner. I was excited but nervous,
determined but anxious, confident but tense. I could only
finish ninth in the batch of 25 examined to select eight
officers for commissioning in the Air Force. I was deeply
disappointed. It took me some time to comprehend that the
opportunity to join the Air Force had just slipped through my
fingers. I dragged myself out of the Selection Board and
stood at the edge of a cliff. There was a lake far below. I
knew that the days ahead would be difficult. There were
questions to be answered and a plan of action to be
prepared. I trekked down to Rishikesh.
I bathed in the Ganga and revelled in the purity of its
water. Then, I walked to the Sivananda Ashram situated a
little way up the hill. I could feel intense vibrations when I
entered. I saw a large number of sadhus seated all around
in a state of trance. I had read that sadhus were psychic
people - people who know things intuitively and, in my
dejected mood, I sought answers to the doubts that
I met Swami Sivananda - a man who looked like a
Buddha, wearing a snow-white dhoti and wooden slippers.
He had an olive complexion and black, piercing eyes. I was
struck by his irresistible, almost childlike smile and
gracious manner. I introduced myself to the Swamiji. My
Muslim name aroused no reaction in him. Before I could
speak any further, he inquired about the source of my
sorrow. He offered no explanation of how he knew that I
was sad and I did not ask.
I told him about my unsuccessful attempt to join the
Indian Air Force and my long-cherished desire to fly. He
smiled, washing away all my anxiety almost instantly. Then
he said in a feeble, but very deep voice,
Desire, when it stems from the heart and spirit, when it
is pure and intense, possesses awesome electromagnetic
energy. This energy is released into the ether each night,
as the mind falls into the sleep state. Each morning it
returns to the conscious state reinforced with the cosmic
currents. That which has been imaged will surely and
certainly be manifested. You can rely, young man, upon this
ageless promise as surely as you can rely upon the
eternally unbroken promise of sunrise... and of Spring.
When the student is ready, the teacher will appear -
How true! Here was the teacher to show the way to a
student who had nearly gone astray! "Accept your destiny
and go ahead with your life. You are not destined to
become an Air Force pilot. What you are destined to
become is not revealed now but it is predetermined. Forget
this failure, as it was essential to lead you to your destined
path. Search, instead, for the true purpose of your
existence. Become one with yourself, my son! Surrender
yourself to the wish of God," Swamiji said.
I returned to Delhi and enquired at the DTD&P(Air)
about the outcome of my interview. In response, I was
handed my appointment letter. I joined the next day as
Senior Scientific Assistant on a basic salary of Rs 250/-
per month. If this was to be my destiny, I thought, let it be so.
Finally, I was filled with mental peace. No more did I feel
any bitterness or resentment at my failure to enter the Air
Force. All this was in 1958.
At the Directorate, I was posted at the Technical Centre
(Civil Aviation). If I was not flying aeroplanes, I was at least
helping to make them airworthy. During my first year in the
Directorate, I carried out a design assignment on
supersonic target aircraft with the help of the officer-in-
charge, R Varadharajan, and won a word of praise from the
Director, Dr Neelakantan. To gain shop-floor exposure to
aircraft maintenance, I was sent to the Aircraft and
Armament Testing Unit (A&ATU) at Kanpur. At that time,
they were involved in a tropical evaluation of Gnat Mk I
aircraft. I participated in the performance assessment of its
Even in those days, Kanpur was a very populous city. It
was my first experience of living in an industrial town. The
cold weather, crowds, noise and smoke were in total
contrast to what I was used to in Rameswaram. I was
particularly troubled by the ubiquitous presence of potatoes
on the dining table, right from breakfast to dinner. To me, it
seemed that a feeling of loneliness pervaded the city. The
people on the streets had all come from their villages in
search of jobs in factories, leaving behind the smell of their
soil and the protection of their families.
On my return to Delhi, I was informed that the design of
a DART target had been taken up at the DTD&P (Air) and
that I had been included in the design team. I completed
this task with the other team members. Then, I undertook a
preliminary design study on a Human Centrifuge. I later
carried out the design and development of a Vertical
Takeoff and Landing Platform. I was also associated with
the development and construction of the Hot Cockpit. Three
years passed. Then the Aeronautical Development
Establishment (ADE) was born in Bangalore and I was
posted to the new establishment.
Bangalore as a city was in direct contrast to Kanpur. In
fact, I feel our country has an uncanny way of bringing out
extremes in her people. I suppose, it is because Indians
have been both afflicted and enriched by centuries of
migrations. Loyalty to different rulers has dulled our
capacity for a single allegiance. Instead, we have
developed an extraordinary ability to be compassionate
and cruel, sensitive and callous, deep and fickle, all at the
same time. To the untrained eye, we may appear colourful
and picturesque; to the critical eye, we are but shoddy
imitations of our various masters. In Kanpur, I saw paan-
chewing imitations of Wajid Ali Shah, and in Bangalore it
was replaced by dog-walking sahibs. Here too, I longed for
the depth and calmness of Rameswaram. The relationship
between the heart and the head of an earthy Indian has
been eroded by the divided sensibilities of our cities. I
spent my evenings exploring the gardens and shopping
The workload at ADE during the first year of its
inception was quite light. In fact, I had to generate work for
myself at first, until the tempo gradually built up. Based on
my preliminary studies on ground-handling equipment, a
project team was formed to design and develop an
indigenous hovercraft prototype as a ground equipment
machine (GEM). The team was a small working group,
comprising four persons at the level of Scientific Assistant.
Dr OP Mediratta, Director of the ADE, asked me to lead
the team. We were given three years to launch the
The project was, by any standards, bigger than our
collective capabilities. None of us had any experience in
building a machine, let alone a flying machine. There were
no designs or standard components available to begin
with. All we knew was that we had to make a successful
heavier-than-air flying machine. We tried to read as much
literature as we could find on hovercrafts, but there was not
much available. We tried to consult people knowledgeable
in this area, but could find none. One day, I simply took the
decision to proceed with the limited information and
This endeavour to produce a wingless, light, swift
machine opened the windows of my mind. I was quick to
see at least a metaphorical connection between a
hovercraft and an aircraft. After all, the Wright Brothers
made the first aeroplane after fixing bicycles for seven
years! I saw in the GEM project great opportunities for
ingenuity and growth. We went straight into hardware
development after spending a few months on the drawing
There is always the danger that a person with my kind of
background - rural or small-town, middle-class, whose
parents had limited education - will retreat into a corner
and remain there struggling for bare existence, unless
some great turn of circumstance propels him into a more
favourable environment. I knew I had to create my own
Part by part, subsystem by subsystem, stage by stage,
things started moving. Working on this project, I learned
that once your mind stretches to a new level it never goes
back to its original dimension.
At that time VK Krishna Menon was the Defence
Minister. He was keenly interested in the progress of our
small project, which he envisioned as the beginning of the
indigenous development of India's defence equipment.
Whenever he was in Bangalore, he always found some
time to review the progress of our project. His confidence in
our ability ignited our enthusiasm. I would enter the
assembly shop leaving my other problems outside, just as
my father used to enter the mosque for prayer, leaving his
But not everyone accepted Krishna Menon's opinion
about GEM. Our experiments with the available parts and
components did not exactly delight my senior colleagues.
Many even called us a group of eccentric inventors in
pursuit of an impossible dream. I, being the leader of the
"navvies", was a particularly inviting target. I was regarded
as yet another country bumpkin who believed that riding the
air was his domain. The weight of opinion against us
buttressed my ever-optimistic mind. The comments of
some of the senior scientists at ADE made me recall John
Trowbridge's famous satirical poem on the Wright
Brothers, published in 1896:
. . . . with thimble and thread
And wax and hammer, and buckles and screws,
And all such things as geniuses use; -
Two bats for patterns, curious fellows!
A charcoal-pot and a pair of bellows.
When the project was about a year old, Defence
Minister Krishna Menon made one of his routine visits to
ADE. I escorted him into our assembly shop. Inside, on a
table lay the GEM model broken down into sub-
assemblies. The model represented the culmination of one
year's untiring efforts to develop a practical hovercraft for
battlefield applications. The minister fired one question
after another at me, determined to ensure that the prototype
would go into test flight within the coming year. He told Dr
Mediratta, "GEM flight is possible with the gadgets Kalam
The hovercraft was christened Nandi, after the bull
ridden by Lord Shiva. For a prototype, its form, fit and finish
was beyond our expectation, given the rudimentary
infrastructure we possessed. I told my colleagues, "Here is
a flying machine, not constructed by a bunch of cranks but
by engineers of ability. Don't look at it - it is not made to
look at, but to fly with."
Defence Minister Krishna Menon flew in the Nandi,
overruling the accompanying officials' concern for his
safety. A Group Captain in the minister's troupe, who had
logged in many thousands of flying hours, even offered to fly
the machine to save the minister from the potential danger
of flying with an inexperienced civilian pilot like myself and
gestured to me to come out of the machine. I was sure
about my competence in flying the machine I had made,
and therefore shook my head in negation. Observing this
wordless communication, Krishna Menon dismissed the
insulting suggestion of the Group Captain with a laugh and
signalled to me to start the machine. He was very happy.
"You have demonstrated that the basic problems of
hovercraft development are solved. Go for a more powerful
prime mover and call me for a second ride," Krishna Menon
told me. The skeptical Group Captain (now Air Marshal)
Golay, later became a good friend of mine.
We completed the project ahead of schedule. We had a
working hovercraft with us, moving on an air cushion of
about 40mm with a load of 550kg, including the tare weight.
Dr Mediratta was visibly pleased with the achievement. But
by this time, Krishna Menon was out of office and could not
take his promised second ride. In the new order, not many
people shared his dream with regard to military
applications of an indigenous hovercraft. In fact, even
today, we import hovercrafts. The project was mired in
controversies and was finally shelved. It was a new
experience for me. So far, I had believed that the sky was
the limit, but now it appeared that the limits were much
closer. There are boundaries that dictate life: you can only
lift so much weight; you can only learn so fast; you can only
work so hard; you can only go so far!
I was unwilling to face reality. I had put my heart and soul
into Nandi. That it would not be used was something
beyond my comprehension. I was disappointed and
disillusioned. In this period of confusion and uncertainty,
memories from my childhood came back to me and I
discovered new meanings in them.
Pakshi Sastry used to say, "Seek the truth, and the truth
shall set you free." As the Bible says, "Ask and you shall
receive." It did not happen immediately, but it happened
nevertheless. One day, Dr Mediratta called me. He inquired
about the state of our hovercraft. When told that it was in
perfect condition to be flown, he asked me to organize a
demonstration for an important visitor the next day. No VIP
was scheduled to visit the laboratory during the next week
as far as I knew. However, I communicated Dr Mediratta's
instructions to my colleagues and we felt a new surge of
The next day Dr Mediratta brought a visitor to our
hovercraft - a tall, handsome, bearded man. He asked me
several questions about the machine. I was struck by the
objectivity and clarity of his thinking. "Can you give me a
ride in the machine?" he enquired. His request filled me
with joy. Finally, here was someone who was interested in
We took a ten-minute ride in the hovercraft, a few
centimetres above the ground. We were not flying, but were
definitely floating in the air. The visitor asked me a few
questions about myself, thanked me for the ride and
departed. But not before introducing himself - he was Prof.
MGK Menon, Director of the Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research (TIFR). After a week, I received a call from the
Indian Committee for Space Research (INCOSPAR), to
attend an interview for the post of Rocket Engineer. All I
knew about INCOSPAR at that time was that it was formed
out of the TIFR talent pool at Bombay (now Mumbai) to
organize space research in India.
I went to Bombay to attend the interview. I was unsure
about the type of questions I would have to face at the
interview. There was hardly any time to read up or talk to
any experienced person. Lakshmana Sastry's voice
quoting from the Bhagawad Gita echoed in my ears:
All beings are born to delusion . . . overcome by the
dualities which arise from wish and hate . . . . But those
men of virtuous deeds in whom sin has come to an end,
freed from the delusion of dualities, worship Me steadfast
I reminded myself that the best way to win was to not
need to win. The best performances are accomplished
when you are relaxed and free of doubt. I decided to take
things as they came. Since neither Prof. MGK Menon's visit
nor the call for an interview had been of my making, I
decided this was the best attitude to take.
I was interviewed by Dr Vikram Sarabhai along with
Prof. MGK Menon and Mr Saraf, then the Deputy Secretary
of the Atomic Energy Commission. As I entered the room, I
sensed their warmth and friendliness. I was almost
immediately struck by Dr Sarabhai's warmth. There was
none of the arrogance or the patronising attitudes which
interviewers usually display when talking to a young and
vulnerable candidate. Dr Sarabhai's questions did not
probe my existing knowledge or skills; rather they were an
exploration of the possibilities I was filled with. He was
looking at me as if in reference to a larger whole. The entire
encounter seemed to me a total moment of truth, in which
my dream was enveloped by the larger dream of a bigger
I was advised to stay back for a couple of days.
However, the next evening I was told about my selection. I
was to be absorbed as a rocket engineer at INCOSPAR.
This was a breakthrough a young man like myself dreamed
My work at INCOSPAR commenced with a
familiarization course at the TIFR Computer Centre. The
atmosphere here was remarkably different from that at
DTD&P (AIR). Labels mattered very little. There was no
need for anyone to justify his position or to be at the
receiving end of the others' hostility.
Some time in the latter half of 1962, INCOSPAR took
the decision to set up the Equatorial Rocket Launching
Station at Thumba, a sleepy fishing village near Trivandrum
(now Thiruvananthapuram) in Kerala. Dr Chitnis of the
Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad had spotted it
as a suitable location as it was very close to the earth's
magnetic equator. This was the quiet beginning of modern
rocket-based research in India. The site selected at
Thumba lay between the railway line and the sea coast,
covering a distance of about two and a half km and
measuring about 600 acres. Within this area, stood a large
church, whose site had to be acquired. Land acquisition
from private parties is always a difficult and time-
consuming process, especially in densely populated places
like Kerala. In addition, there was the delicate matter of
acquiring a site of religious significance. The Collector of
Trivandrum then, K Madhavan Nair, executed this task in a
most tactful, peaceful and expeditious manner, with the
blessings and cooperation of Right Rev. Dr Dereira, who
was the Bishop of Trivandrum in 1962. Soon RD John, the
executive engineer of the Central Public Works Department
(CPWD), had transformed the entire area. The St. Mary
Magdalene church housed the first office of the Thumba
Space Centre. The prayer room was my first laboratory, the
Bishop's room was my design and drawing office. To this
day, the church is maintained in its full glory and, at present,
houses the Indian Space Museum.
Very soon after this, I was asked to proceed to America
for a sixmonth training programme on sounding rocket
launching techniques, at the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (NASA) work centres. I took some
time off before going abroad and went to Rameswaram.
My father was very pleased to learn about the opportunity
that had come my way. He took me to the mosque and
organized a special namaz in thanksgiving. I could feel the
power of God flowing in a circuit through my father to me
and back to God; we were all under the spell of the prayer.
One of the important functions of prayer, I believe, is to
act as a stimulus to creative ideas. Within the mind are all
the resources required for successful living. Ideas are
present in the consciousness, which when released and
given scope to grow and take shape, can lead to
successful events. God, our Creator, has stored within our
minds and personalities, great potential strength and
ability. Prayer helps us to tap and develop these powers.
Ahmed Jallaluddin and Samsuddin came to see me off
at Bombay airport. It was their first exposure to a big city
like Bombay, just as I myself was about to have my first
exposure to a mega city like New York. Jallaluddin and
Samsuddin were self-reliant, positive, optimistic men who
undertook their work with the assurance of success. It is
from these two persons that I drew the core creative power
of my mind. My sentiments could not be contained, and I
could feel the mist of tears in my eyes. Then, Jallaluddin
said, "Azad, we have always loved you, and we believe in
you. We shall always be proud of you". The intensity and
purity of their faith in my capabilities broke my last
defences, and tears welled up in my eyes.
[ 1963 - 1980 ]

started my work at NASA at the Langley Research
Centre (LRC) in Hampton, Virginia. This is primarily an
R&D centre for advanced aerospace technology. One of
my most vivid memories
of LRC is of a piece of sculpture depicting a charioteer
driving two horses, one representing scientific research
and the other technological development, metaphorically
encapsulating the interconnection between research and
From LRC I went to the Goddard Space Flight Centre
(GSFC) at Greenbelt, Maryland. This Centre develops and
manages most of NASA's earth-orbiting science and
applications satellites. It operates NASA's tracking
networks for all space missions. Towards the end of my
visit, I went to the Wallops Flight Facility at Wallops Island in
East Coast, Virginia. This place was the base for NASA's
sounding rocket programme. Here, I saw a painting
prominently displayed in the reception lobby. It depicted a
battle scene with a few rockets flying in the background. A
painting with this theme should be the most commonplace
thing at a Flight Facility, but the painting caught my eye
because the soldiers on the side launching the rockets
were not white, but dark-skinned, with the racial features of
people found in South Asia. One day, my curiosity got the
better of me, drawing me towards the painting. It turned out
to be Tipu Sultan's army fighting the British. The painting
depicted a fact forgotten in Tipu's own country but
commemorated here on the other side of the planet. I was
happy to see an Indian glorified by NASA as a hero of
My impression of the American people can be
summarized by a quotation from Benjamin Franklin, "Those
things that hurt instruct!" I realised that people in this part of
the world meet their problems head on. They attempt to get
out of them rather than suffer them.
My mother had once narrated an incident from the Holy
Book - after God created man, he asked the angels to
prostrate themselves before Adam. Everybody prostrated
themselves except Iblis, or Satan, who refused. "Why did
you not prostrate yourself?" Allah asked. "You created me
of fire and him of clay. Does not that make me nobler than
Adam?" Satan contended. God said, "Be gone from
paradise! This is no place for your contemptuous pride."
Satan obeyed, but not before cursing Adam with the same
fate. Soon Adam followed suit by becoming a transgressor
after eating the forbidden fruit. Allah said, "Go hence and
may your descendants live a life of doubt and mistrust."
What makes life in Indian organizations difficult is the
widespread prevalence of this very contemptuous pride. It
stops us from listening to our juniors, subordinates and
people down the line. You cannot expect a person to deliver
results if you humiliate him, nor can you expect him to be
creative if you abuse him or despise him. The line between
firmness and harshness, between strong leadership and
bullying, between discipline and vindictiveness is very fine,
but it has to be drawn. Unfortunately, the only line
prominently drawn in our country today is between the
'heroes' and the 'zeros'. On one side are a few hundred
'heroes' keeping nine hundred and fifty million people down
on the other side. This situation has to be changed.
As the process of confronting and solving problems
often requires hard work and is painful, we have endless
procrastination. Actually, problems can be the cutting edge
that actually distinguish between success and failure. They
draw out innate courage and wisdom.
As soon as I returned from NASA, India's first rocket
launch took place on 21 November 1963. It was a sounding
rocket, called NikeApache, made at NASA. The rocket was
assembled in the church building I have referred to earlier.
The only equipment available to transport the rocket was a
truck and a manually operated hydraulic crane. The
assembled rocket was to be shifted from the church
building to the launch pad by truck. When the rocket was
lifted by the crane and was about to be placed on the
launcher, it started tilting, indicating a leak in the hydraulic
system of the crane. As we were fast approaching the
launch time, 6 p.m., any repairs to the crane had to be ruled
out. Fortunately, the leak was not large and we managed to
lift the rocket manually, using our collective muscle power
and finally placing it on the launcher.
In the maiden Nike-Apache launch, I was in charge of
rocket integration and safety. Two of my colleagues who
played a very active and crucial role in this launch were D
Easwardas and R Aravamudan. Easwardas undertook the
rocket assembly and arranged the launch. Aravamudan,
whom we called Dan, was in charge of radar, telemetry and
ground support. The launch was smooth and problemfree.
We obtained excellent flight data and returned with a sense
of pride and accomplishment.
When we were relaxing the next evening at the dinner
table, we received news of the assassination of President
John F Kennedy in Dallas, Texas. We were appalled. The
Kennedy years were a significant era in America, when
young men were at the helm of affairs. I used to read with
interest about Kennedy's moves in the missile crisis of late
1962. The Soviet Union built missile sites in Cuba, from
which it would have been possible to launch attacks on
American cities. Kennedy imposed a blockade or
'quarantine', barring the introduction of any offensive
missiles to Cuba. America also threatened to respond to
any Soviet nuclear attack from Cuba on any country in the
Western Hemisphere by retaliating against the USSR. After
fourteen days of intense drama, the crisis was resolved by
the Soviet Premier Khrushchev ordering that the Cuban
bases be dismantled and the missiles returned to Russia.
The next day, Prof. Sarabhai had a detailed discussion
with us on future plans. He was creating a new frontier in
the field of science and technology in India. A new
generation, scientists and engineers in their 30s and early
40s, was being charged with an unprecedented dynamism.
Our biggest qualifications at INCOSPAR were not our
degrees and training, but Prof. Sarabhai's faith in our
capabilities. After the successful launch of Nike-Apache, he
chose to share with us his dream of an Indian Satellite
Prof. Sarabhai's optimism was highly contagious. The
very news of his coming to Thumba would electrify people
and all laboratories, workshops and design offices would
hum with unceasing activity. People would work virtually
round the clock because of their enthusiasm to show Prof.
Sarabhai something new, something that had not been
done before in our country - be it a new design or a new
method of fabrication or even an out-of-the-way
administrative procedure. Prof. Sarabhai would often
assign multiple tasks to a single person or a group. Though
some of those tasks would appear totally unrelated in the
beginning, they would, at a later stage, emerge as deeply
interconnected. When Prof. Sarabhai was talking to us
about the Satellite Launch Vehicle (SLV), he asked me,
almost in the same breath, to take up studies on a
rocketassisted take-off system (RATO) for military aircraft.
The two things had no apparent connection except in the
mind of this great visionary. I knew that all I had to do was to
remain alert and focussed on my purpose, and sooner or
later, an opportunity to do a challenging job would enter my
Prof. Sarabhai was ever-willing to try out novel
approaches and liked to draw in young people. He had the
wisdom and judgement which enabled him to realise not
only if something was well done, but also when it was time
to stop. In my opinion, he was an ideal experimenter and
innovator. When there were alternative courses of action
before us, whose outcome was difficult to predict, or to
reconcile varying perspectives, Prof. Sarabhai would resort
to experimentation to resolve the issue. This was precisely
the situation at INCOSPAR in 1963. A bunch of young,
inexperienced, but nevertheless energetic and enthusiastic
persons were given the task of fleshing out the spirit of
selfreliance in the field of science and technology in
general, and of space research in particular. It was a great
example of leadership by trust.
The rocket launch site later blossomed into the Thumba
Equatorial Rocket Launch Station (TERLS). TERLS was
established through active collaboration with France, USA
and USSR. The leader of the Indian space programme -
Prof. Vikram Sarabhai - had comprehended the full
implications of the challenge and had not balked at taking it
on. Right from the day INCOSPAR was formed, he was
aware of the need to organize an integrated national space
programme, with the equipment for the manufacture of
rockets and launch facilities developed and produced
With this in view, a wide-ranging programme for
scientific and technological development in rocket fuels,
propulsion systems, aeronautics, aerospace materials,
advanced fabrication techniques, rocket motor
instrumentation, control and guidance systems, telemetry,
tracking systems and scientific instruments for
experimentation in space were launched at the Space
Science and Technology Centre and the Physical
Research Laboratory at Ahmedabad. Incidentally, this
laboratory has produced a large number of Indian space
scientists of extremely high calibre over the years.
The real journey of the Indian aerospace programme,
however, had begun with the Rohini Sounding Rocket
(RSR) Programme. What is it that distinguishes a sounding
rocket from a Satellite Launch Vehicle (SLV) and from a
missile? In fact, they are three different kinds of rockets.
Sounding rockets are normally used for probing the near-
earth environment, including the upper regions of the
atmosphere. While they can carry a variety of scientific
payloads to a range of altitudes, they cannot impart the final
velocity needed to orbit the payload. On the other hand, a
launch vehicle is designed to inject into orbit a
technological payload or satellite. The final stage of a
launch vehicle provides the necessary velocity for a satellite
to enter an orbit. This is a complex operation requiring on-
board guidance and control systems. A missile, though
belonging to the same family, is a still more complex
system. In addition to the large terminal velocity and
onboard guidance and control, it must have the capability to
home onto targets. When the targets are fast-moving and
capable of manoeuvring, a missile is also required to carry
The RSR programme was responsible for the
development and fabrication of sounding rockets and their
associated on-board systems for scientific investigations in
India. Under this programme, a family of operational
sounding rockets were developed. These rockets had wide
ranging capabilities, and to date several hundreds of these
rockets have been launched for various scientific and
I still remember that the first Rohini rocket consisted of a
single solid propulsion motor weighing a mere 32 kg. It
lifted a nominal 7 kg payload to an altitude of about 10 km.
It was soon followed by another, to which one more solid
propellant stage was added to dispatch multi-experiment
payloads weighing nearly 100 kg to an altitude of over 350
The development of these rockets had resulted in a fully
indigenous capability in the production of sounding rockets
as well as their propellants. This programme had brought
into the country technology for the production of very high-
performance solid propellants, like those based on
polyurethane and polybutane polymer. It later resulted in the
setting up of a Propellant Fuel Complex (PFC) to
manufacture strategic chemicals required for rocket
engines, and a Rocket Propellant Plant (RPP) to produce
The development of Indian rockets in the twentieth
century can be seen as a revival of the eighteenth century
dream of Tipu Sultan. When Tipu Sultan was killed, the
British captured more than 700 rockets and subsystems of
900 rockets in the battle of Turukhanahally in 1799. His
army had 27 brigades, called Kushoons, and each brigade
had a company of rocket men, called Jourks. These
rockets had been taken to England by William Congreve
and were subjected by the British to what we call 'reverse
engineering' today. There were, of course, no GATT, IPR
Act, or patent regime. With the death of Tipu, Indian
rocketry also met its demise - at least for 150 years.
Meanwhile, rocket technology made great strides
abroad. Konstantin Tsiolkovsky in Russia (1903), Robert
Goddard in USA (1914) and Hermann Oberth in Germany
(1923) gave rocketry new dimensions. In Nazi Germany,
Wernher von Braun's group produced V-2 short range
ballistic missiles and showered fire on the Allied Forces.
After the war, both the USA and the USSR captured their
share of German rocket technology and rocket engineers.
With this booty, they started to run their deadly arms race
with missiles and warheads.
Rocketry was reborn in India thanks to the technological
vision of Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru. Prof. Sarabhai
took the challenge of giving physical dimensions to this
dream. Very many individuals with myopic vision
questioned the relevance of space activities in a newly
independent nation which was finding it difficult to feed its
population. But neither Prime Minister Nehru nor Prof.
Sarabhai had any ambiguity of purpose. Their vision was
very clear: if Indians were to play a meaningful role in the
community of nations, they must be second to none in the
application of advanced technologies to their real-life
problems. They had no intention of using it merely as a
means to display our might.

uring his frequent visits to Thumba, Prof. Sarabhai
would openly review the progress of work with the entire
team. He never gave directions. Rather, through a free
of views, he led us forward into new terrain which often
revealed an unforeseen solution. Perhaps he was aware
that though a particular goal might be clear to himself, and
he could give adequate directions for its accomplishment,
his team members might have resisted working towards a
goal that made no sense to them. He considered the
collective understanding of the problem the main attribute
of effective leadership. He once told me, "Look, my job is to
make decisions; but it is equally important to see to it that
these decisions are accepted by my team members."
In fact, Prof. Sarabhai took a series of decisions that
were to become the life-mission of many. We would make
our own rockets, our own Satellite Launch Vehicles (SLVs)
and our own satellites. And this would not be done one-by-
one but concurrently, in a multi-dimensional fashion. In the
development of payloads for the sounding rockets, instead
of getting a certain payload and then engineering it to fit
into the rocket, we discussed the matter threadbare with
the payload scientists working in different organ-izations
and at different locations. I may even say that the most
significant achievement of the sounding rocket programme
was to establish and maintain nation-wide mutual trust.
Perhaps realising that I preferred to persuade people to
do as they were told rather than use my legitimate authority,
Prof. Sarabhai assigned me the task of providing interface
support to payload scientists. Almost all physical
laboratories in India were involved in the sounding rocket
programme, each having its own mission, its own objective
and its own payload. These payloads were required to be
integrated to the rocket structure so as to ensure their
proper functioning and endurance under flight conditions.
We had X-ray payloads to look at stars; payloads fitted with
radio frequency mass spectrometers to analyse the gas
composition of the upper atmosphere; sodium payloads to
find out wind conditions, its direction and velocity. We also
had ionospheric payloads to explore different layers of the
atmosphere. I not only had to interact with scientists from
TIFR, National Physical Laboratory (NPL), and Physical
Research Laboratory (PRL), but also with payload
scientists from USA, USSR, France, Germany and Japan.
I often read Khalil Gibran, and always find his words full
of wisdom. "Bread baked without love is a bitter bread that
feeds but half a man's hunger," - those who cannot work
with their hearts achieve but a hollow, half-hearted success
that breeds bitterness all around. If you are a writer who
would secretly prefer to be a lawyer or a doctor, your written
words will feed but half the hunger of your readers; if you
are a teacher who would rather be a businessman, your
instructions will meet but half the need for knowledge of
your students; if you are a scientist who hates science, your
performance will satisfy but half the needs of your mission.
The personal unhappiness and failure to achieve results
that comes from being a round peg in a square hole is not,
by any means, new. But there are exceptions to this like
Prof. Oda and Sudhakar, who bring to their work a personal
touch of magic based upon their individual character,
personality, inner motives, and perhaps the dreams
crystallized within their hearts. They become so emotionally
involved with their work that any dilution of the success of
their effort fills them with grief.
Prof. Oda was an X-ray payload scientist from the
Institute of Space and Aeronautical Sciences (ISAS),
Japan. I remember him as a diminutive man with a towering
personality and eyes that radiated intelligence. His
dedication to his work was exemplary. He would bring X-
ray payloads from ISAS, which along with the X-ray
payloads made by Prof. UR Rao, would be engineered by
my team to fit into the nose cone of the Rohini Rocket. At
an altitude of 150 km, the nose cone would be separated
by explosion of pyros triggered by an electronic timer. With
this, the X-ray sensors would be exposed to space for
collecting the required information about the emissions
from stars. Together, Prof. Oda and Prof. Rao were a
unique blend of intellect and dedication, which one rarely
sees. One day, when I was working on the integration for
Prof. Oda's payload with my timer devices, he insisted on
using the timers he had brought from Japan. To me they
looked flimsy, but Prof. Oda stuck to his stand that the
Indian timers be replaced by the Japanese ones. I yielded
to his suggestion and replaced the timers. The rocket took
off elegantly and attained the intended altitude. But the
telemetry signal reported mission failure on account of
timer malfunction. Prof. Oda was so upset that tears welled
up in his eyes. I was stunned by the emotional intensity of
Prof. Oda's response. He had clearly put his heart and soul
Sudhakar was my colleague in the Payload Preparation
Laboratory. As part of the pre-launch schedule, we were
filling and remotely pressing the hazardous sodium and
thermite mix. As usual, it was a hot and humid day at
Thumba. After the sixth such operation, Sudhakar and I
went into the payload room to confirm the proper filling of
the mix. Suddenly, a drop of sweat from his forehead fell
onto the sodium, and before we knew what was happening,
there was a violent explosion which shook the room. For a
few paralysed seconds, I did not know what to do. The fire
was spreading, and water would not extinguish the sodium
fire. Trapped in this inferno, Sudhakar, however, did not
lose his presence of mind. He broke the glass window with
his bare hands and literally threw me out to safety before
jumping out himself. I touched Sudhakar's bleeding hands
in gratitude, he was smiling through his pain. Sudhakar
spent many weeks in the hospital recuperating from the
severe burns he had received.
At TERLS, I was involved with rocket preparation
activities, payload assembly, testing and evaluation
besides building subsystems like payload housing and
jettisonable nose cones. Working with the nose cones led
me, as a natural consequence, into the field of composite
It is interesting to know that the bows found, during
archaeological excavations at different sites in the country,
reveal that Indians used composite bows made of wood,
sinew, and horn as early as the eleventh century, at least
500 years before such bows were made in medieval
Europe. The versatility of composites, in the sense that they
possess very desirable structural, thermal, electrical,
chemical and mechanical properties, fascinated me. I was
so enthused with these man-made materials that I was in a
hurry to know everything about them almost overnight. I
used to read up everything available on related topics. I
was particularly interested in the glass and carbon Fibre
Reinforced Plastic (FRP) composites.
An FRP composite is composed of an inorganic fibre
woven into a matrix that encloses it and gives the
component its bulk form. In February 1969, Prime Minister
Indira Gandhi visited Thumba to dedicate TERLS to the
International Space Science Community. On this occasion,
she commissioned the country's first filament winding
machine in our laboratory. This event brought my team,
which included CR Satya, PN Subramanian and MN
Satyanara-yana, great satisfaction. We made highstrength
glass cloth laminates to build non-magnetic payload
housings and flew them in two-stage sounding rockets. We
also wound and test flew rocket motor casings of up to 360
Slowly, but surely, two Indian rockets were born at
Thumba. They were christened Rohini and Menaka, after
the two mythological dancers in the court of Indra, the king
of the sky. The Indian payloads no longer needed to be
launched by French rockets. Could this have been done but
for the atmosphere of trust and commitment which Prof.
Sarabhai had created at INCOSPAR? He brought into use
each person's knowledge and skills. He made every man
feel directly involved in problem solving. By the very fact of
the team members' participation, the solutions became
genuine and earned the trust of the entire team resulting in
total commitment towards implementation.
Prof. Sarabhai was matter-of-fact and never tried to
hide his disappointment. He used to talk with us in an
honest and objective manner. Sometimes I found him
making things look more positive than they actually were,
and then charming us by his almost magical powers of
persuasion. When we were at the drawing board, he would
bring someone from the developed world for a technical
collaboration. That was his subtle way of challenging each
one of us to stretch our capabilities.
At the same time, even if we failed to meet certain
objectives, he would praise whatever we had
accomplished. Whenever he found any one of us going
over his head and attempting a task for which he did not
have the capability or skill, Prof. Sarabhai would reassign
activity in such a way so as to lower pressure and permit
better quality work to be performed. By the time the first
Rohini-75 rocket was launched from TERLS on 20
November 1967, almost each one of us was in his own
Early next year, Prof. Sarabhai wanted to see me
urgently in Delhi. By now I was accustomed to Prof.
Sarabhai's working methods. He was always full of
enthusiasm and optimism. In such a state of mind, sudden
flashes of inspiration were almost natural. On reaching
Delhi, I contacted Prof. Sarabhai's secretary for an
appointment and was asked to meet him at 3.30 a.m. at
Hotel Ashoka. Delhi being a slightly unfamiliar place, with
an unfriendly climate for someone like me, conditioned to
the warm and humid climate of South India, I decided to
wait in the hotel lounge after finishing my dinner.
I have always been a religious person in the sense that I
maintain a working partnership with God. I was aware that
the best work required more ability than I possessed and
therefore I needed help that only God could give me. I made
a true estimate of my own ability, then raised it by 50 per
cent and put myself in God's hands. In this partnership, I
have always received all the power I needed, and in fact
have actually felt it flowing through me. Today, I can affirm
that the kingdom of God is within you in the form of this
power, to help achieve your goals and realise your dreams.
There are many different types and levels of experience
that turn this internal power reaction critical. Sometimes,
when we are ready, the gentlest of contacts with Him fills us
with insight and wisdom. This could come from an
encounter with another person, from a word, a question, a
gesture or even a look. Many a time, it could come even
through a book, a conversation, some phrase, even a line
from a poem or the mere sight of a picture. Without the
slightest warning, something new breaks into your life and a
secret decision is taken, a decision that you may be
completely unconscious of, to start with.
I looked around the elegant lounge. Somebody had left
a book on a nearby sofa. As if to fill the small hours of that
cold night with some warm thoughts, I picked up the book
and started browsing. I must have turned only a few pages
of the book, about which I do not remember a thing today.
It was some popular book related to business
management. I was not really reading it, only skimming over
paragraphs and turning pages. Suddenly, my eyes fell on a
passage in the book, it was a quotation from George
Bernard Shaw. The gist of the quote was that all
reasonable men adapt themselves to the world. Only a few
unreasonable ones persist in trying to adapt the world to
themselves. All progress in the world depends on these
unreasonable men and their innovative and often
I started reading the book from the Bernard Shaw
passage onwards. The author was describing certain
myths woven around the concept and the process of
innovation in industry and business. I read about the myth of
strategic planning. It is generally believed that substantial
strategic and technological planning greatly increases the
odds of a 'no surprises' outcome. The author was of the
opinion that it is essential for a project manager to learn to
live with uncertainty and ambiguity. He felt that it was a myth
to hold that the key to economic success is computability. A
quotation from General George Patton was given as a
counterpoint to this myth - that a good plan violently
executed right now is far better than a perfect plan
executed next week. It is a myth that to win big one must
strive to optimize, the author felt. Optimization wins only on
paper, but would invariably lose later in the real world, the
Waiting in the hotel lobby at 1 a.m. for an appointment
two hours later was certainly not a reasonable proposition,
neither for me nor for Prof. Sarabhai. But then, Prof.
Sarabhai had always exhibited a strong component of
unorthodoxy in his character. He was running the show of
space research in the country - under-staffed, overworked
- nevertheless in a successful manner.
Suddenly, I became aware of another man who came
and sat down on the sofa opposite mine. He was a well-
built person with an intelligent look and refined posture.
Unlike me - always disorderly in my dress - this man was
wearing elegant clothes. Notwithstanding the odd hours, he
was alert and vivacious.
There was a strange magnetism about him which
derailed the train of my thoughts on innovation. And before I
could get back to the book, I was informed that Prof.
Sarabhai was ready to receive me. I left the book on the
nearby sofa from where I had picked it up. I was surprised
when the man sitting on the opposite sofa was also asked
to come inside. Who was he? It was not long before my
question was answered. Even before we sat down, Prof.
Sarabhai introduced us to each other. He was Group
Captain VS Narayanan from Air Headquarters.
Prof. Sarabhai ordered coffee for both of us and
unfolded his plan of developing a rocket-assisted take-off
system (RATO) for military aircraft. This would help our
warplanes to take off from short runways in the Himalayas.
Hot coffee was served over small talk. It was totally
uncharacteristic of Prof. Sarabhai. But as soon as we
finished the coffee, Prof. Sarabhai rose and asked us to
accompany him to Tilpat Range on the outskirts of Delhi.
As we were passing through the lobby, I threw a cursory
glance at the sofa where I had left the book. It was not there.
It was about an hour's drive to the Range. Prof.
Sarabhai showed us a Russian RATO. "If I get you the
motors of this system from Russia, could you do it in
eighteen months time?" Prof. Sarabhai asked us. "Yes, we
can!" Both Gp Capt VS Narayanan and I spoke almost
simultaneously. Prof. Sarabhai's face beamed, reflecting
our fascination. I recalled what I had read, "He will bestow
on you a light to walk in."
After dropping us back at the Hotel Ashoka, Prof.
Sarabhai went to the Prime Minister's house for a
breakfast meeting. By that evening, the news of India taking
up the indigenous development of a device to help short run
take-offs by high performance military aircraft, with myself
heading the project, was made public. I was filled with many
emotions - happiness, gratitude, a sense of fulfilment and
these lines from a littleknown poet of the nineteenth-century
For all your days prepare
And meet them ever alike
When you are the anvil, bear -
When you are the hammer, strike.
RATO motors were mounted on aircraft to provide the
additional thrust required during the take-off run under
certain adverse operating conditions like partially bombed-
out runways, high altitude airfields, more than the
prescribed load, or very high ambient temperatures. The
Air Force was in dire need of a large number of RATO
motors for their S22 and HF-24 aircraft.
The Russian RATO motor shown to us at the Tilpat
Range was capable of generating a 3000 kg thrust with a
total impulse of 24500 kgseconds. It weighed 220 kg and
had a double base propellant encased in steel. The
development work was to be carried out at the Space
Science and Technology Centre with the assistance of the
Defence Research and Development Organization
(DRDO), HAL, DTD&P(Air) and Air Headquarters.
After a detailed analysis of the available options, I
chose a fibreglass motor casing. We decided in favour of a
composite propellant which gives a higher specific impulse
and aimed at a longer burning time to utilize it completely. I
also decided to take additional safety measures by
incorporating a diaphragm which would rupture if the
chamber pressure for some reason exceeded twice the
operating pressure. Two significant developments occurred
during the work on RATO. The first was the release of a
ten-year profile for space research in the country, prepared
by Prof. Sarabhai. This profile was not merely an activity
plan laid down by the top man for his team to comply with, it
was a theme paper meant for open discussions, to be later
transformed into a programme. In fact, I found it was the
romantic manifesto of a person deeply in love with the
space research programme in his country.
The plan mainly centred around the early ideas which
had been born at INCOSPAR; it included utilization of
satellites for television and developmental education,
meteorological observations and remote sensing for
management of natural resources. To this had been added
the development and launch of satellite launch vehicles.
The active international cooperation dominant in the
early years was virtually eased out in this plan and the
emphasis was on self-reliance and indigenous
technologies. The plan talked about the realisation of a
SLV for injecting lightweight satellites into a low earth orbit,
upgrading of Indian satellites from laboratory models to
space entities and development of a wide range of
spacecraft subsystems like the apogee and booster
motors, momentum wheel, and solar panel deployment
mechanism. It also promised a wide range of technological
spin-offs like the gyros, various types of transducers,
telemetry, adhesives, and polymers for non-space
applications. Over and above, there was the dream of an
adequate infrastructure that would be capable of supporting
R&D in a variety of engineering and scientific disciplines.
The second development was the formation of a Missile
Panel in the Ministry of Defence. Both Narayanan and I
were inducted as members. The idea of making missiles in
our own country was exciting, and we spent hours on end
studying the missiles of various advanced countries.
The distinction between a tactical missile and a
strategic missile is often a fine one. Generally, by
'strategic', it is understood that the missile will fly thousands
of kilometres. However, in warfare, this term is used to
denote the kind of target rather than its distance from
missile launch. Strategic missiles are those that strike at
the enemy's heartland, either in counter-force attacks on
their strategic forces or in counter-value attacks on the
society, which in essence means his cities. Tactical
weapons are those that influence a battle, and the battle
may be by land, sea or air, or on all three together. This
categorization now appears nonsensical, as the US Air
Force's ground-launched Tomahawk is used in a tactical
role, notwithstanding its range of some 3000 km. In those
days, however, strategic missiles were synonymous with
intermediate range ballistic missiles (IRBMs) with ranges in
the order of 1500 nautical miles or 2780 km and inter-
continental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) with a capability of
Gp Capt Narayanan had an ineffable enthusiasm for
indigenous guided missiles. He was a great admirer of the
strong arm approach of the Russian Missile Development
Programme. "When it could be done there, why not here,
where space research has already prepared the soil for a
bonanza of missile technology?" Narayanan used to needle
The bitter lessons of the two wars in 1962 and 1965
had left the Indian leadership with little choice in the matter
of achieving self-reliance in military hardware and weapon
systems. A large number of Surfaceto-Air Missiles (SAMs)
were obtained from the USSR to guard strategic locations.
Gp Capt Narayanan passionately advocated the
development of these missiles in the country.
While working together on RATO motors and on the
Missile Panel, Narayanan and I played the roles of student
and teacher interchangeably wherever required. He was
very eager to learn about rocketry and I was very curious to
know about airborne weapon systems. The depth of
Narayanan's conviction and his force of application were
inspiring. Right from the day of our pre-dawn visit to the
Tilpat Range with Prof. Sarabhai, Narayanan was always
busy with his RATO motor. He had arranged everything that
was required before being asked. He obtained funding of
Rs 75 lakhs with a further commitment towards any
unforeseen costs. "You name the thing and I will get it for
you, but do not ask for time," he said. At times, I often
laughed at his impatience, and read for him these lines
from T.S. Eliot's Hollow Men:
Defence R&D at that time was heavily dependent on
imported equipment. Virtually nothing indigenous was
available. Together, we made a long shopping list and
drew up an import plan. But this made me unhappy - was
there no remedy or alternative? Was this nation doomed to
live with screwdriver technology? Could a poor country like
India afford this kind of development?
One day, while working late in the office, which was
quite routine after I took up the RATO projects, I saw a
young colleague, Jaya Chandra Babu going home. Babu
had joined us a few months ago and the only thing I knew
about him was that he had a very positive attitude and was
articulate. I called him into my office and did a bit of loud
thinking. "Do you have any suggestions?" I then asked him.
Babu remained silent for a while, and then asked for time
until the next evening to do some homework before
The next evening, Babu came to me before the
appointed time. His face was beaming with promise. "We
can do it, sir! The RATO system can be made without
imports. The only hurdle is the inherent inelasticity in the
approach of the organization towards procurement and
subcontracting, which would be the two major thrust areas
to avoid imports." He gave me seven points, or, rather,
asked for seven liberties - financial approval by a single
person instead of an entire hierarchy, air travel for all
people on work irrespective of their entitlement,
accountability to only one person, lifting of goods by air-
cargo, sub-contracting to the private sector, placement of
orders on the basis of technical competence, and
These demands were unheard of in government
establishments, which tend to be conservative, yet I could
see the soundness of his proposition. The RATO project
was a new game and there was nothing wrong if it was to
be played with a new set of rules. I weighed all the pros and
cons of Babu's suggestions for a whole night and finally
decided to present them to Prof. Sarabhai. Hearing my
plea for administrative liberalization and seeing the merits
behind it, Prof. Sarabhai approved the proposals without a
Through his suggestions, Babu had highlighted the
importance of business acumen in developmental work
with high stakes. To make things move faster within
existing work parameters, you have to pump in more
people, more material and more money. If you can't do that,
change your parameters! Instinctive businessman that he
was, Babu did not remain long with us and left ISRO for
greener pastures in Nigeria. I could never forget Babu's
common sense in financial matters.
We had opted for a composite structure for the RATO
motor casing using filament fibre glass/epoxy. We had also
gone in for a high energy composite propellant and an
event-based ignition and jettisoning system in real-time. A
canted nozzle was designed to deflect the jet away from the
aircraft. We conducted the first static test of RATO in the
twelfth month of the project initiation. Within the next four
months, we conducted 64 static tests. And we were just
about 20 engineers working on the project!

The future satellite launch vehicle (SLV) had also been
conceived by this time. Recognising the immense socio-
economic benefits of space technology, Prof. Sarabhai
decided in 1969, to go full-steam ahead with the task of
establishing indigenous capability in building and launching
our own satellites. He personally participated in an aerial
survey of the east coast for a possible site for launching
satellite launch vehicles and large rockets.
Prof. Sarabhai was concentrating on the east coast in
order to let the launch vehicle take full advantage of the
earth's west to east rotation. He finally selected the
Sriharikota island, 100 km north of Madras (now Chennai),
and thus the SHAR Rocket Launch Station was born. The
crescent-shaped island has a maximum width of 8 km and
lies alongside the coastline. The island is as big as Madras
city. The Buckingham Canal and the Pulicat lake form its
In 1968, we had formed the Indian Rocket Society.
Soon after, the INCOSPAR was reconstituted as an
advisory body under the Indian National Science Academy
(INSA) and the Indian Space Research Organization
(ISRO) was created under the Department of Atomic
Energy (DAE) to conduct space research in the country.
By this time, Prof. Sarabhai had already hand-picked a
team to give form to his dream of an Indian SLV. I consider
myself fortunate to have been chosen to be a project
leader. Prof. Sarabhai gave me the additional
responsibility of designing the fourth stage of the SLV. Dr
VR Gowarikar, MR Kurup and AE Muthunayagam were
given the tasks of designing the other three stages.
What made Prof. Sarabhai pick a few of us for this
great mission? One reason seemed to be our professional
background. Dr Gowarikar was doing outstanding work in
the field of composite propellants. MR Kurup had
established an excellent laboratory for propellants,
propulsion and pyrotechnics. Muthunayagam had proved
himself in the field of high energy propellants. The fourth
stage was to be a composite structure and called for a
large number of innovations in fabrication technology;
perhaps that was why I was brought in.
I laid the foundation for Stage IV on two rocks - sensible
approximation and unawed support. I have always
considered the price of perfection prohibitive and allowed
mistakes as a part of the learning process. I prefer a dash
of daring and persistence to perfection. I have always
supported learning on the part of my team members by
paying vigilant attention to each of their attempts, be they
In my group, progress was recognized and reinforced at
every tiny step. Although I provided access to all the
information that my co-workers in Stage IV needed, I found I
could not spend enough time to be a useful facilitator and a
source of support. I wondered if there was something
wrong with the way in which I managed my time. At this
stage, Prof. Sarabhai brought a French visitor to our work
centre to point out the problem to me. This gentleman was
Prof. Curien, President of CNES (Centre Nationale de
Etudes Spatiales), our counterpart in France. They were
then developing the Diamont launch vehicles. Prof. Curien
was a thorough professional. Together, Prof. Sarabhai and
Prof. Curien helped me set a target. While they discussed
the means by which I could reach it, they also cautioned me
about the possibilities of failure. While I arrived at a better
awareness of Stage IV problems through the supportive
counselling of Prof. Curien, Prof. Sarabhai's catalytic
intervention led Prof. Curien to reinterpret his own progress
in the Diamont programme.
Prof. Curien advised Prof. Sarabhai to relieve me of all
the minor jobs which posed little challenge and to give me
more opportunities for achievement. He was so impressed
by our well-planned efforts that he inquired if we could
make the Diamont's fourth stage. I recall how this brought a
subtle smile to Prof. Sarabhai's face.
As a matter of fact, the Diamont and SLV airframes
were incompatible. The diameters were quite different and
to attain interchangeability, some radical innovations were
required. I wondered where I should start. I decided to look
around for solutions among my own colleagues. I used to
carefully observe my colleagues to see if their daily routine
reflected their desire to constantly experiment. I also started
asking and listening to anyone who showed the slightest
promise. Some of my friends cautioned me about what they
termed as my naivete. I made it an unfailing routine to make
notes on individual suggestions and gave handwritten
notes to colleagues in engineering and design, requesting
concrete follow-up action within five or ten days.
This method worked wonderfully well. Prof. Curien
testified, while reviewing our progress, that we had
achieved in a year's time what our counterparts in Europe
could barely manage in three years. Our plus point, he
noted, was that each of us worked with those below and
above in the hierarchy. I made it a point to have the team
meet at least once every week. Though it took up time and
energy, I considered it essential.
How good is a leader? No better than his people and
their commitment and participation in the project as full
partners! The fact that I got them all together to share
whatever little development had been achieved - results,
experiences, small successes, and the like - seemed to
me worth putting all my energy and time into. It was a very
small price to pay for that commitment and sense of
teamwork, which could in fact be called trust. Within my own
small group of people I found leaders, and learned that
leaders exist at every level. This was another important
aspect of management that I learned.
We had modified the existing SLV-IV Stage design to
suit the Diamont airframe. It was reconfigured and
upgraded from a 250 kg, 400 mm diameter stage to a 600
kg, 650 mm diameter stage. After two years' effort, when
we were about to deliver it to CNES, the French suddenly
cancelled their Diamont BC programme. They told us that
they did not need our Stage IV anymore. It was a great
shock, making me re-live the earlier disappointments at
Dehra Dun, when I failed to get into the Air Force, and at
Bangalore, when the Nandi project was aborted at ADE.
I had invested great hope and effort in the fourth stage,
so that it could be flown with a Diamont rocket. The other
three stages of SLV, involving enormous work in the area
of rocket propulsion were at least five years away.
However, it did not take me long to shelve the
disappointment of Diamont BC Stage IV. After all, I had
thoroughly enjoyed working on this project. In time, RATO
filled the vacuum created in me by the Diamont BC Stage.
When the RATO project was underway, the SLV project
slowly started taking shape. Competence for all major
systems of a launch vehicle had been established in
Thumba by now. Through their outstanding efforts, Vasant
Gowarikar, MR Kurup and Muthunayagam prepared
TERLS for a big leap in rocketry.
Prof. Sarabhai was an exemplar in the art of team-
building. On one occasion, he had to identify a person who
could be given the responsibility for developing a
telecommand system for the SLV. Two men were
competent to carry out this task - one was the seasoned
and sophisticated UR Rao and the other was a relatively
unknown experimenter, G Madhavan Nair. Although I was
deeply impressed by Madhavan Nair's dedication and
abilities, I did not rate his chances as very good. During
one of Prof. Sarabhai's routine visits, Madhavan Nair boldly
demonstrated his improvised but highly reliable
telecommand system. Prof. Sarabhai did not take much
time to back the young experimenter in preference to an
established expert. Madhavan Nair not only lived up to the
expectations of his leader but even went beyond them. He
was to later become the project director of the Polar
Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV).
SLVs and missiles can be called first cousins: they are
different in concept and purpose, but come from the same
bloodline of rocketry. A massive missile development
project had been taken up by DRDO at the Defence
Research & Development Laboratory (DRDL), Hyderabad.
As the pace of this surface-to-air missile development
project increased, the frequency of the Missile Panel
meetings and my interaction with Gp Capt Narayanan also
In 1968, Prof. Sarabhai came to Thumba on one of his
routine visits. He was shown the operation of the nose-cone
jettisoning mechanism. As always, we were all anxious to
share the results of our work with Prof. Sarabhai. We
requested Prof. Sarabhai to formally activate the pyro
system through a timer circuit. Prof. Sarabhai smiled, and
pressed the button. To our horror, nothing happened. We
were dumbstruck. I looked at Pramod Kale, who had
designed and integrated the timer circuit. In a flash each of
us mentally went through an anlysis of the failure. We
requested Prof. Sarabhai to wait for a few minutes, then we
detached the timer device, giving direct connection to the
pyros. Prof. Sarabhai pressed the button again. The pyros
were fired and the nose cone was jettisoned. Prof.
Sarabhai congratulated Kale and me; but his expression
suggested that his thoughts were elsewhere. We could not
guess what was on his mind. The suspense did not last for
long and I got a call from Prof. Sarabhai's secretary to meet
him after dinner for an important discussion.
Prof. Sarabhai was staying at the Kovalam Palace
Hotel, his usual home whenever he was in Trivandrum. I
was slightly perplexed by the summons. Prof. Sarabhai
greeted me with his customary warmth. He talked of the
rocket launching station, envisaging facilities like launch
pads, block houses, radar, telemetry and so on - things
which are taken for granted in Indian space research today.
Then he brought up the incident that had occurred that
morning. This was exactly what I had feared. My
apprehension of a reproach from my leader, however, was
unfounded. Prof. Sarabhai did not conclude that the failure
of the pyro timer circuit was the outcome of insufficient
knowledge and lack of skill on the part of his people or of
faulty understanding at the direction stage. He asked me
instead, if we were unenthused by a job that did not pose
sufficient challenge. He also asked me to consider if my
work was possibly being affected by any problem of which I
was hitherto unaware. He finally put his finger on the key
issue. We lacked a single roof to carry out system
integration of all our rocket stages and rocket systems.
Electrical and mechanical integration work was going on
with a significant phase difference - both in time and in
space. There was little effort to bring together the disparate
work on electrical and mechanical integration. Prof.
Sarabhai spent the next hour in re-defining our tasks, and,
in the small hours of the morning, the decision to set up a
Rocket Engineering Section was taken.
Mistakes can delay or prevent the proper achievement
of the objectives of individuals and organizations, but a
visionary like Prof. Sarabhai can use errors as
opportunities to promote innovation and the development of
new ideas. He was not especially concerned with the
mistake in the timer circuit, least of all with pinning the
blame for it. Prof. Sarabhai's approach to mistakes rested
on the assumption that they were inevitable but generally
manageable. It was in the handling of the crises that arose
as a consequence that talent could often be revealed. I later
realised by experience, that the best way to prevent errors
was to anticipate them. But this time, by a strange twist of
fate, the failure of the timer circuit led to the birth of a rocket
It was my usual practice to brief Prof. Sarabhai after
every Missile Panel Meeting. After attending one such
meeting in Delhi on 30 December 1971, I was returning to
Trivandrum. Prof. Sarabhai was visiting Thumba that very
day to review the SLV design. I spoke to him on the
telephone from the airport lounge about the salient points
that had emerged at the panel meeting. He instructed me to
wait at Trivandrum Airport after disembarking from the
Delhi flight, and to meet him there before his departure for
Bombay the same night.
When I reached Trivandrum, a pall of gloom hung in the
air. The aircraft ladder operator Kutty told me in a choked
voice that Prof. Sarabhai was no more. He had passed
away a few hours ago, following a cardiac arrest. I was
shocked to the core; it had happened within an hour of our
conversation. It was a great blow to me and a huge loss to
Indian science. That night passed in preparations for
airlifting Prof. Sarabhai's body for the cremation in
For five years, between 1966 to 1971, about 22
scientists and engineers had worked closely with Prof.
Sarabhai. All of them were later to take charge of important
scientific projects. Not only was Prof. Sarabhai a great
scientist, but also a great leader. I still remember him
reviewing the bi-monthly progress of the design projects of
SLV-3 in June 1970. Presentations on Stages I to IV were
arranged. The first three presentations went through
smoothly. Mine was the last presentation. I introduced five
of my team members who had contributed in various ways
to the design. To everybody's surprise, each of them
presented his portion of the work with authority and
confidence. The presentations were discussed at length
and the conclusion was that satisfactory progress had been
Suddenly, a senior scientist who worked closely with
Prof. Sarabhai turned to me and enquired, "Well, the
presentations for your project were made by your team
members based on their work. But what did you do for the
project?" That was the first time I saw Prof. Sarabhai really
annoyed. He told his colleague, "You ought to know what
project management is all about. We just witnessed an
excellent example. It was an outstanding demonstration of
team work. I have always seen a project leader as an
integrator of people and that is precisely what Kalam is." I
consider Prof. Sarabhai as the Mahatma Gandhi of Indian
science - generating leadership qualities in his team and
inspiring them through both ideas and example.
After an interim arrangement with Prof. MGK Menon at
the helm, Prof. Satish Dhawan was given the responsibility
of heading ISRO. The whole complex at Thumba, which
included TERLS, the Space Science and Technology
Centre (SSTC), the RPP, the Rocket Fabrication Facility
(RFF), and the Propellant Fuel Complex (PFC) were
merged together to form an integrated space centre and
christened the Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC) as
a tribute to the man to whom it owed its existence. The
renowned metallurgist, Dr Brahm Prakash, took over as the
first Director of VSSC.
The RATO system was successfully tested on 8
October 1972 at Bareilly Air Force station in Uttar Pradesh,
when a high performance Sukhoi-16 jet aircraft became
airborne after a short run of 1200 m, as against its usual run
of 2 km. We used the 66th RATO motor in the test. The
demonstration was watched by Air Marshal Shivdev Singh
and Dr BD Nag Chaudhury, then the Scientific Adviser to
the Defence Minister. This effort was said to have saved
approximately Rs 4 crores in foreign exchange. The vision
of the industrialist scientist had finally borne fruit.
Before taking up the responsibility of organizing space
research in India and becoming the chairman of
INCOSPAR, Prof. Sarabhai had established a number of
successful industrial enterprises. He was aware that
scientific research could not survive in isolation, away from
industry. Prof. Sarabhai founded Sarabhai Chemicals,
Sarabhai Glass, Sarabhai Geigy Limited, Sarabhai Merck
Limited, and the Sarabhai Engineering Group. His Swastik
Oil Mills did pioneering work in the extraction of oil from
oilseeds, manufacture of synthetic detergents and of
cosmetics. He geared Standard Pharmaceuticals Limited
to enable large-scale manufacture of penicillin, which was
imported from abroad at astronomical costs at that time.
Now with the indigenization of RATO, his mission had
acquired a new dimension - independence in the
manufacture of military hardware and the potential saving of
crores of rupees in foreign exchange. I recalled this on the
day of the successful trial of the RATO system. Including
trial expenses, we spent less than Rs. 25 lakhs on the
entire project. The Indian RATO could be produced at
Rs.17,000 apiece, and it replaced the imported RATO,
which cost Rs. 33,000.
At the Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre, work on the
SLV went on at full swing. All the subsystems had been
designed, technologies identified, processes established,
work centres selected, manpower earmarked and
schedules drawn. The only hitch was the lack of a
management structure to effectively handle this mega-
project and coordinate activities which were spread over a
large number of work centres with their own ways of
Prof. Dhawan, in consultation with Dr Brahm Prakash,
picked me for this job. I was appointed the Project
Manager - SLV, and reported directly to the Director,
VSSC. My first task was to work out a project management
plan. I wondered why I was selected for this task when there
were stalwarts like Gowarikar, Muthunayagam, and Kurup
around. With organizers like Easwardas, Aravamudan, and
SC Gupta available, how would I do better? I articulated my
doubts to Dr Brahm Prakash. He told me not to focus on
what I saw as other people's strengths compared to my
own, but instead, to attempt to expand their abilities.
Dr Brahm Prakash advised me to take care of the
performance degraders and cautioned me against
outrightly seeking optimal performance from the
participating work centres. "Everyone will work to create
their bit of SLV; your problem is going to be your
dependency on others in accomplishing the total SLV. The
SLV mission will be accomplished with, and through, a
large number of people. You will require a tremendous
amount of tolerance and patience," he said. It reminded me
of what my father used to read to me from the Holy Qur'an
on the distinction between right and wrong: "We have sent
no apostle before you who did not eat or walk about the
market squares. We test you by means of one another. Will
you not have patience?"
I was aware of the contradiction that often occurred in
such situations. People heading teams often have one of
the following two orientations: for some, work is the most
important motivation; for others, their workers are the all-
consuming interest. There are many others who fall either
between these two positions or outside them. My job was
going to be to avoid those who were interested neither in
the work nor in the workers. I was determined to prevent
people from taking either extreme, and to promote
conditions where work and workers went together. I
visualized my team as a group in which each member
worked to enrich the others in the team and experience the
enjoyment of working together.
The primary objectives of the SLV Project were design,
development and operation of a standard SLV system,
SLV-3, capable of reliably and expeditiously fulfilling the
specified mission of launching a 40 kg satellite into a 400
km circular orbit around the earth.
As a first step, I translated the primary project objectives
into some major tasks. One such task was the development
of a rocket motor system for the four stages of the vehicle.
The critical problems in the completion of this task were:
making an 8.6 tonne propellant grain and a high mass ratio
apogee rocket motor system which would use highenergy
propellants. Another task was vehicle control and guidance.
Three types of control systems were involved in this task -
aerodynamic surface control, thrust vector control and
reaction control for the first, second and third stages and
the spin-up mechanism for the fourth stage. Inertial
reference for control systems and guidance through inertial
measurement was also imperative. Yet another major task
was the augmentation of launch facilities at SHAR with
systems integration and checkout facilities and
development of launch support systems such as launchers
and vehicle assembly fixtures. A target of 'all line' flight test
within 64 months was set in March 1973.
I took up the executive responsibility of implementing
the project within the framework of policy decisions taken,
the approved management plan, and the project report; and
also within the budget and through the powers delegated to
me by the Director, VSSC. Dr Brahm Prakash formed four
Project Advisory Committees to advise me on specialized
areas like rocket motors, materials and fabrication, control
and guidance, electronics, and mission and launching. I
was assured of the guidance of outstanding scientists like
DS Rane, Muthunayagam, TS Prahlad, AR Acharya, SC
Gupta, and CL Amba Rao, to name a few.
The Holy Qur'an says: "We have sent down to you
revelations showing you an account of those who have
gone before you and an admonition to righteous men." I
sought to share the wisdom of these extremely brilliant
people. "Light upon light. Allah guides to His light whom He
will. He has knowledge of all things."
We made three groups to carry out the project activities
- a Programme Management Group, an Integration and
Flight Testing Group and a Subsystems Development
Group. The first Group was made responsible for looking
after the overall executive aspects of SLV-3: project
management, including administration, planning and
evaluation, subsystems specifications, materials,
fabrication, quality assurance and control. The Integration
and Flight Testing Group was assigned the tasks of
generation of facilities required for integration and flight
testing of SLV-3. They were also asked to carry out the
analysis of the vehicle, including mechanical and
aerodynamic interface problems. The Subsystems
Development Group was given the job of interacting with
various divisions of VSSC and was made responsible for
ensuring that all technological problems in the development
of various subsystems were overcome by creating a
synergy amongst the available talent in these divisions.
I projected a requirement of 275 engineers and
scientists for SLV-3 but could get only about 50. If it had not
been for synergistic efforts, the whole project would have
remained a non-starter. Some young engineers like MSR
Dev, G Madhavan Nair, S Srinivasan, US Singh,
Sunderrajan, Abdul Majeed, Ved Prakash Sandlas,
Namboodiri, Sasi Kumar, and Sivathanu Pillai developed
their own ground rules designed to help them work
efficiently as a project team, and produced outstanding
individual and team results. These men were in the habit of
celebrating their successes together - in a sort of mutual
appreciation club. This boosted morale, and helped them a
great deal to accept setbacks and to revitalize themselves
after periods of intense work.
Each member of the SLV-3 project team was a
specialist in his own field. It was natural therefore that each
one of them valued his independence. To manage the
performance of such specialists the team leader has to
adopt a delicate balance between the hands-on and the
hands-off approach. The hands-on approach takes an
active interest on a very regular basis in the members'
work. The hands-off approach trusts team members and
recognizes their need for autonomy to carry out their roles,
as they see fit. It hinges on their self-motivation. When the
leader goes too far with the hands-on approach, he is seen
as an anxious and interfering type. If he goes too far hands-
off, he is seen as abdicating his responsibility or not being
interested. Today, the members of the SLV-3 team have
grown to lead some of the country's most prestigious
programmes. MSR Dev heads the Augmented Satellite
Launch Vehicle (ASLV) project, Madhavan Nair is the chief
of the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) project and
Sandlas and Sivathanu Pillai are Chief Controllers in
DRDO Headquarters. Each one of these men rose to his
present position through consistent hard work and rocklike
will power. It was indeed an exceptionally talented team.

aving taken up the leadership of executing the SLV-3
project, I faced urgent and conflicting demands on my time
- for committee work, material procurement,
reviews, briefings, and for the need to be informed on a
wide range of subjects.
My day would start with a stroll of about 2 km around the
lodge I was living in. I used to prepare a general schedule
during my morning walk, and emphasize two or three things
I would definitely like to accomplish during the day,
including at least one thing that would help achieve long-
Once in the office, I would clean the table first. Within the
next ten minutes, I would scan all the papers and quickly
divide them into different categories: those that required
immediate action, low priority ones, ones that could be kept
pending, and reading material. Then I would put the high
priority papers in front of me and everything else out of
Coming back to SLV-3, about 250 sub-assemblies and
44 major subsystems were conceived during the design.
The list of materials went up to over 1 million components.
A project implementation strategy had become essential to
achieve sustained viability of this complex programme of
seven to ten years' duration. From his side, Prof. Dhawan
came up with a clear statement that all the manpower and
funds at VSSC and SHAR would have to be directed to us.
From our side, we evolved a matrix type of management to
achieve productive interfacing with more than 300
industries. The target was that our interaction with them
must lead to their technology empowerment. Three things I
stressed before my colleagues - importance of design
capability, goal setting and realisation, and the strength to
withstand setbacks. Now, before I dwell on the finer
aspects of the management of the SLV-3 project, let me
talk about the SLV-3 itself.
It is interesting to describe a launch vehicle
anthropomorphically. The main mechanical structure may
be visualized as the body of a human being, the control and
guidance systems with their associated electronics
constitute the brain. The musculature comes from
propellants. How are they made? What are the materials
A large variety of materials go into the making of a
launch vehicle - both metallic and non-metallic, which
include composites and ceramics. In metals, different types
of stainless steel, alloys of aluminium, magnesium, titanium,
copper, beryllium, tungsten and molybdenum are used.
Composite materials are composed of a mixture or
combination of two or more constituents which differ in form
and material composition and which are essentially
insoluble in one another. The materials which combine may
be metallic, organic or inorganic. While other material
combinations possible are virtually unlimited, the most
typical composites in launch vehicles are made of structural
constituents, embedded in a matrix. We used a large
variety of glass fibre reinforced plastic composites and
opened avenues for the entry of Kevlar, polyamides and
carbon-carbon composites. Ceramics are special types of
baked clay used for microwave transparent enclosures. We
considered using ceramics, but had to reject the idea then
due to technological limitations.
Through mechanical engineering, these materials are
transformed into hardware. In fact, of all the engineering
disciplines which feed directly into the development of
rocketry, mechanical engineering is perhaps the most
intrinsic one. Be it a sophisticated system like a liquid
engine or a piece of hardware as simple as a fastener, its
ultimate fabrication calls for expert mechanical engineers
and precision machine tools. We decided to develop
important technologies like welding techniques for low-alloy
stainless steel, electroforming techniques, and ultra-
precision process tooling. We also decided to make some
important machines in-house, like the 254-litre vertical
mixer and the groove machining facility for our third and
fourth stages. Many of our subsystems were so massive
and complex that they implied sizeable financial outlays.
Without any hesitation, we approached industries in the
private sector and developed contract management plans
which later became blueprints for many government-run
science and technology business organizations.
Coming to the life part of the SLV, there is the complex
electrical circuitry, which sets the mechanical structure in
motion. This vast spectrum of activities, encompassing
simple electrical power supplies to sophisticated
instrumentation as well as guidance and control systems is
collectively referred to in aerospace research as 'Avionics'.
Development efforts in avionic systems had already been
initiated at VSSC in the field of digital electronics,
microwave radars and radar transponders, and inertial
components and systems. It is very important to know the
state of the SLV when it is in flight. SLV brought a new
surge of activity in the development of a variety of
transducers for measurement of physical parameters like
pressure, thrust, vibration, acceleration, etc. The
transducers convert the physical parameters of the vehicle
into electrical signals. An on-board telemetry system
processes these signals suitably and transmits them in the
form of radio signals to the ground stations, where they are
received and deciphered back to the original information
collected by the transducers. If the systems work according
to design there is little cause for concern; but in case
something goes wrong, the vehicle must be destroyed to
stop it from making any unexpected moves. To ensure
safety, a special tele-command system was made to
destroy the rocket in case it malfunctions, and an
interferrometer system was developed to determine the
range and position of the SLV, as a added means to the
radar system. The SLV project also initiated the indigenous
production of sequencers which time the various events,
such as ignition, stage separation, vehicle altitude
programmers which store the information for the rocket
manoeuvres, and auto-pilot electronics which take
appropriate decisions to steer the rocket along its
Without the energy to propel the whole system, a launch
vehicle remains grounded. A propellant is usually a
combustible substance that produces heat and supplies
ejection particles in a rocket engine. It is both a source of
energy and a working substance for expanding energy.
Because the distinction is more decisive in rocket engines,
the term propellant is used primarily to describe chemicals
carried by rockets for propulsive purposes.
It is customary to classify propellants as either solids or
liquids. We concentrated on solid propellants. A solid
propellant consists essentially of three components: the
oxidizer, the fuel and the additives. Solid propellants are
further classified into two types: composite and double
base. The former consists of an oxidizer or inorganic
material (like ammonium perchlorate) in a matrix of organic
fuel (like synthetic rubber). Double base propellants were
distant dreams those days but nevertheless we dared to
All this self sufficiency and indigenous manufacture
came gradually, and not always without pain. We were a
team of almost self-trained engineers. In retrospect I feel
the unique blend of our untutored talent, character, and
dedication suited SLV development the most. Problems
surfaced regularly and almost consistently. But my team
members never exhausted my patience. I recall writing after
winding up a late night shift:
Beautiful hands are those that do
Work that is earnest and brave and true
The long day through.
Almost parallel to our work on SLV, the DRDO was
preparing itself for developing an indigenous surface-to-air
missile. The RATO project was abandoned because the
aircraft for which it was designed became obsolete. The
new aircraft did not need RATO. With the project called off,
Narayanan was DRDO's logical choice to lead the team for
making the missile. Unlike us at ISRO, they preferred the
philosophy of one-toone substitution rather than technology
development and performance upgrading. The Surface-to-
Air Missile SA-2 of Russian origin was chosen to acquire
detailed knowledge of all the design parameters of a
proven missile and to establish, thereby, the necessary
infrastructure required in the organization. It was thought
that once one-to-one indigenization was established,
further advances in the sophisticated field of guided
missiles would be a natural fall-out. The project was
sanctioned in February 1972 with the code name Devil and
funding of about Rs. 5 crore was made available for the first
three years. Almost half of it was to go in foreign exchange.
By now promoted to Air Commodore, Narayanan took
over as Director, DRDL. He mobilized this young laboratory
located in the southeastern suburbs of Hyderabad to take
up this enormous task. The landscape dotted with tombs
and old buildings started reverberating with new life.
Narayanan was a man of tremendous energy - a man
always in the boost phase. He gathered around him a
strong group of enthusiastic people, drawing many service
officers into this predominantly civilian laboratory. Totally
preoccupied with the SLV affairs, my participation in the
Missile Panel meetings gradually dwindled, and then
stopped altogether. However, stories about Narayanan and
his Devil were beginning to reach Trivandrum. A
transformation of an unprecedented scale was taking place
During my association with Narayanan in the RATO
project, I had discovered that he was a hard taskmaster -
one who went all out for control, mastery and domination. I
used to wonder if managers like him, who aim at getting
results no matter what the price, would face a rebellion of
silence and non-cooperation in the long run.
New Year's day, 1975, brought with it an opportunity to
have a firstperson assessment of the work going on under
Narayanan's leadership. Prof. MGK Menon, who was
working then as Scientific Advisor to the Defence Minister
and was head of the DRDO, appointed a review committee
under the chairmanship of Dr Brahm Prakash to evaluate
the work carried out in the Devil Project. I was taken into the
team as a rocket specialist to evaluate the progress made
in the areas of aerodynamics, structure and propulsion of
the missile. On the propulsion aspects, I was assisted by
BR Somasekhar and by Wg Cdr P Kamaraju. The
committee members included Dr RP Shenoy and Prof. IG
Sarma who were to review the work done on the electronic
We met at DRDL on 1 and 2 January 1975, followed by
a second session after about six weeks. We visited the
various development work centres and held discussions
with the scientists there. I was greatly impressed by the
vision of AV Ranga Rao, the dynamism of Wg Cdr R
Gopalaswami, the thoroughness of Dr I Achyuta Rao, the
enterprise of G Ganesan, S Krishnan's clarity of thought
and R Balakrishnan's critical eye for detail. The calm of JC
Bhattacharya and Lt Col R Swaminathan in the face of
immense complexities was striking. The zeal and
application of Lt Col VJ Sundaram was conspicuous. They
were a brilliant, committed group of people - a mix of
service officers and civilian scientists - who had trained
themselves in the areas of their own interest out of their
driving urge to fly an Indian missile.
We had our concluding meeting towards the end of
March 1975 at Trivandrum. We felt that the progress in the
execution of the project was adequate in respect of
hardware fabrication to carry out the philosophy of one-to-
one substitution of missile subsystems except in the liquid
rocket area, where some more time was required to
succeed. The committee was of the unanimous opinion that
DRDL had achieved the twin goals of hardware fabrication
and system analysis creditably in the design and
development of the ground electronics complex assigned
We observed that the one-to-one substitution
philosophy had taken precedence over the generation of
design data. Consequently, many design engineers had not
been able to pay adequate attention to the necessary
analysis which was the practice followed by us at VSSC.
The system analysis studies carried out up to then had also
been only of a preliminary nature. In all, the results
accomplished were outstanding, but we still had a long way
to go. I recalled a school poem:
Don't worry and fret, fainthearted,
The chances have just begun,
For the best jobs haven't been started,
The best work hasn't been done.
The committee made a strong recommendation to the
Government to give Devil a further go-ahead. Our
recommendation was accepted and the project proceeded.
Back home at VSSC, SLV was taking shape. In
contrast to the DRDL which was sprinting ahead, we were
moving slowly. Instead of following the leader, my team was
trekking towards success on several individual paths. The
essence of our method of work was an emphasis on
communication, particularly in the lateral direction, among
the teams and within the teams. In a way, communication
was my mantra for managing this gigantic project. To get
the best from my team members, I spoke to them frequently
on the goals and objectives of the organization,
emphasizing the importance of each member's specific
contribution towards the realisation of these goals. At the
same time, I tried to be receptive to every constructive idea
emanating from my subordinates and to relay it in an
appropriate form for critical examination and
implementation. I had written somewhere in my diary of that
If you want to leave your footprints
On the sands of time
Do not drag your feet.
Most of the time, communication gets confused with
conversation. In fact, the two are distinctly different. I was
(and am) a terrible conversationalist but consider myself a
good communicator. A conversation full of pleasantries is
most often devoid of any useful information, whereas
communication is meant only for the exchange of
information. It is very important to realise that
communication is a twoparty affair which aims at passing
on or receiving a specific piece of information.
While working on the SLV, I used communication to
promote understanding and to come to an agreement with
colleagues in defining the problems that existed and in
identifying the action necessary to be taken to solve them.
Authentic communication was one of the tools skilfully used
in managing the project. How did I do that ? To begin with, I
tried to be factual and never sugar-coated the bitter pill of
facts. At one of the Space Science Council (SSC) review
meetings, frustrated by the procurement delays, I erupted
into an agitated complaint against the indifference and red-
tape tactics of the controller of accounts and financial
advisor of VSSC. I insisted that the systems of work
followed by the accounts staff had to change and
demanded the delegation of their functions to the project
team. Dr Brahm Prakash was taken aback by the bluntness
of my submission. He stubbed out his cigarette and walked
out of the meeting.
I spent the whole night regretting the pain my harsh
words had caused Dr Brahm Prakash. However, I was
determined to fight the inertia built into the system before I
found myself being dragged down with it. I asked myself a
practical question: could one live with these insensitive
bureaucrats? The answer was a big no. Then I asked
myself a private question: what would hurt Dr Brahm
Prakash more, my seemingly harsh words now, or the
burial of the SLV at a later stage? Finding my head and
heart agreeing, I prayed to God for help. Fortunately for me,
Dr Brahm Prakash delegated financial powers to the
project the next morning.
Anyone who has taken up the responsibility to lead a
team can be successful only if he is sufficiently
independent, powerful and influential in his own right to
become a person to reckon with. This is perhaps also the
path to individual satisfaction in life, for freedom with
responsibility is the only sound basis for personal
happiness. What can one do to strengthen personal
freedom? I would like to share with you two techniques I
adopt in this regard.
First, by building your own education and skills.
Knowledge is a tangible asset, quite often the most
important tool in your work. The more up-to-date the
knowledge you possess, the freer you are. Knowledge
cannot be taken away from anyone except by
obsolescence. A leader can only be free to lead his team if
he keeps abreast of all that is happening around him - in
real time. To lead, in a way, is to engage in continuing
education. In many countries, it is normal for professionals
to go to college several nights every week. To be a
successful team leader, one has to stay back after the din
and clutter of a working day to emerge better-equipped and
ready to face a new day.
The second way is to develop a passion for personal
responsibility. The sovereign way to personal freedom is to
help determine the forces that determine you. Be active!
Take on responsibility! Work for the things you believe in. If
you do not, you are surrendering your fate to others. The
historian Edith Hamilton wrote of ancient Greece, "When
the freedom they wished for most was freedom from
responsibility, then Athens ceased to be free and was
never free again". The truth is that there is a great deal that
most of us can individually do to increase our freedom. We
can combat the forces that threaten to oppress us. We can
fortify ourselves with the qualities and conditions that
promote individual freedom. In doing so, we help to create
a stronger organization, capable of achieving
As work on the SLV gained momentum, Prof. Dhawan
introduced the system of reviewing progress with the entire
team involved in the project. Prof. Dhawan was a man with
a mission. He would effortlessly pull together all the loose
ends to make work move smoothly. At VSSC the review
meetings presided over by Prof. Dhawan used to be
considered major events. He was a true captain of the
ISRO ship - a commander, navigator, housekeeper, all
rolled into one. Yet, he never pretended to know more than
he did. Instead, when something appeared ambiguous, he
would ask questions and discuss his doubts frankly. I
remember him as a leader for whom to lead with a firm, but
fair hand, was a moral compulsion. His mind used to be
very firm once it had been decided on any issue. But before
taking a decision, it used to be like clay, open to
impressions until the final moulding. Then the decisions
would be popped into the potter's oven for glazing, never
failing to emerge hard and tough, resistant and enduring.
I had the privilege of spending a great deal of time with
Prof. Dhawan. He could hold the listener enthralled
because of the logical, intellectual acumen he could bring to
bear on his analysis of any subject. He had an unusual
combination of degrees - a B.Sc. in Mathematics and
Physics, an M.A. in English Literature, B.E. in Mechanical
Engineering, M.S. in Aeronautical Engineering followed by
a Ph.D. in Aeronautics and Mathematics from the
California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in USA.
Intellectual debates with him were very stimulating and
could always mentally energize me and my team members.
I found him full of optimism and compassion. Although he
often judged himself harshly, with no allowances or
excuses, he was generous to a fault when it came to others.
Prof. Dhawan used to sternly pronounce his judgements
and then pardon the contrite guilty parties.
In 1975, ISRO became a government body. An ISRO
council was formed consisting of Directors of different work
centres and senior officers in the Department of Space
(DoS). This provided a symbolic link as well as a forum for
participative management between the DoS which had the
Governmental powers and the centres which would execute
the jobs. In the traditional parlance of Government
departments, ISRO's centres would have been subordinate
units or attached offices, but such words were never
spoken either at ISRO or DoS. Participative management,
which calls for active interaction between those who wield
administrative powers and the executing agencies, was a
novel feature of ISRO management that would go a long
way in Indian R&D organizations.
The new set-up brought me in contact with TN Seshan,
the Joint Secretary in the DoS. Till then, I had a latent
reservation about bureaucrats, so I was not very
comfortable when I first saw Seshan participating in a SLV-
3 Management Board meeting. But soon, it changed to
admiration for Seshan, who would meticulously go through
the agenda and always come for the meetings prepared.
He used to kindle the minds of scientists with his
The first three years of the SLV project was the period
for the revelation of many fascinating mysteries of science.
Being human, ignorance has always been with us, and
always will be. What was new was my awareness of it, my
awakening to its fathomless dimensions. I used to
erroneously suppose that the function of science was to
explain everything, and that unexplained phenomena were
the province of people like my father and Lakshmana
Sastry. However, I always refrained from discussing these
matters with any of my scientist colleagues, fearing that it
would threaten the hegemony of their meticulously formed
Gradually, I became aware of the difference between
science and technology, between research and
development. Science is inherently open-ended and
exploratory. Development is a closed loop. Mistakes are
imperative in development and are made every day, but
each mistake is used for modification, upgradation or
betterment. Probably, the Creator created engineers to
make scientists achieve more. For each time scientists
come up with a thoroughly researched and fully
comprehended solution, engineers show them yet another
lumineu, yet one more possibility. I cautioned my team
against becoming scientists. Science is a passion - a
never-ending voyage into promises and possibilities. We
had only limited time and limited funds. Our making the
SLV depended upon our awareness of our own limits. I
preferred existing workable solutions which would be the
best options. Nothing that is new comes into time-bound
projects without its own problems. In my opinion, a project
leader should always work with proven technologies in
most of the systems as far as possible and experiment only

The SLV-3 project had been formulated in such a way
that the major technology work centres, both at VSSC and
at SHAR could handle propellant production, rocket motor
testing and launch of any large diameter rocket. As
participants in the SLV-3 project, we set three milestones
for ourselves: development and flight qualification of all
subsystems through sounding rockets by 1975; sub-orbital
flights by 1976; and the final orbital flight in 1978. The work
tempo had picked up now and the atmosphere was
charged with excitement. Wherever I went, our teams had
something interesting to show me. A large number of things
were being done for the first time in the country and the
groundlevel technicians had had no prior exposure to this
kind of work. I saw new performance dimensions growing
among my team members.
Performance dimensions are factors that lead to
creation. They go beyond competencies such as the skills
and knowledge of the individual. Performance dimensions
are broader and deeper than what a person must know and
be able to do in order to function well in his or her job. They
include attitudes, values and character traits. They exist at
various levels of the human personality. At the behavioural
level - at the outermost ring of the tree - we can observe
skills and measure knowledge. Social roles and self-image
dimensions are found at the intermediate level. Motives
and traits exist at the innermost or core level. If we can
identify those performance dimensions which are most
highly correlated with job success, we can put them
together to form a blueprint for outstanding performance in
both thought and action.
Although SLV-3 was still in the future, its subsystems
were being completed. In June 1974, we used the Centaur
sounding rocket launch to test some of our critical systems.
A scaled down heat shield of SLV, Rate Gyro Unit, and
Vehicle Attitude Programmer were integrated into the
Centaur rocket. The three systems involved wide-ranging
expertise - composite materials, control engineering and
software, none of them ever having been tried before in the
country. The test was a complete success. Until then the
Indian Space Programme had not gone beyond sounding
rockets and even knowledgeable people were not ready to
see and acknowledge its efforts as anything more serious
than fiddling around with meteorological instruments. For
the first time, we inspired the confidence of the nation.
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi told Parliament on 24 July
1974, "The development and fabrication of relevant
technologies, subsystems and hardware (to make India's
first Satellite Launch Vehicle) are progressing satisfactorily.
A number of industries are engaged in the fabrication of
components. The first orbital flight by India is scheduled to
take place in 1978."
Like any other act of creation, the creation of the SLV-3
also had its painful moments. One day, when my team and I
were totally engrossed in the preparation of the static test
of the first stage motor, the news of a death in the family
reached me. My brother-in-law and mentor Jenab Ahmed
Jallaludin, was no more. For a couple of minutes, I was
immobilized, I could not think, could not feel anything. When
I could focus on my surroundings once more and attempted
to participate in the work, I found myself talking incoherently
- and then I realised that, with Jallaluddin, a part of me had
passed away too. A vision of my childhood reappeared
before me - evening walks around the Rameswaram
temple, shining sand and dancing tides in the moonlight,
stars looking down from an unlit sky on a new moon night,
Jallaluddin showing me the horizon sinking into the sea,
arranging money for my books, and seeing me off at Santa
Cruz airport. I felt that I had been thrown into a whirlpool of
time and space. My father, by now more than a hundred
years old, pallbearer for his son-in-law, who had been half
his age; the bereft soul of my sister Zohara, her wounds
from the loss of her four-year-old son still raw - these
images came before my eyes in a blur, too terrible for me
to comprehend. I leaned on the assembly jig, composed
myself and left a few instructions with Dr S Srinivasan,
Deputy Project Director, to carry on with the work in my
Travelling overnight in a combination of district buses, I
reached Rameswaram only the next day. During this time, I
did my best to free myself from the very past which
appeared to have come to an end with Jallaluddin. But the
moment I reached my house, grief assailed me afresh. I
had no words for Zohara or for my niece Mehboob, both of
whom were crying uncontrollably. I had no tears to shed.
We sorrowfully put Jallaluddin's body to rest.
My father held my hands for a long time. There were no
tears in his eyes either. "Do you not see, Abul, how the Lord
lengthens the shadows? Had it been His will, He could have
made them constant. But He makes the sun their guide,
little by little He shortens them. It is He who has made the
night a mantle for you, and sleep a rest. Jallaluddin has
gone into a long sleep - a dreamless sleep, a complete
rest of all his being within simple unconsciousness. Nothing
will befall us except what Allah has ordained. He is our
Guardian. In Allah, my son, put your trust." He slowly closed
his wrinkled eyelids and went into a trance-like state.
Death has never frightened me. After all, everyone has
to go one day. But perhaps Jallaluddin went a little too
early, a little too soon. I could not bring myself to stay for
long at home. I felt the whole of my inner self drowning in a
sort of anxious agitation, and inner conflicts between my
personal and my professional life. For many days, back in
Thumba, I felt a sense of futility I had never known before -
about everything I was doing.
I had long talks with Prof. Dhawan. He told me that my
progress on the SLV project would bring me solace. The
confusion would first lessen and would later pass away
altogether. He drew my attention to the wonders of
technology and its achievements.
Gradually, the hardware began emerging from the
drawing boards. Sasi Kumar built a very effective network
of fabrication work centres. Within days of getting a
component drawing, he would embark on the fabrication
with what was available. Namboodiri and Pillai were
spending their days and nights at the propulsion laboratory
developing four rocket motors simultaneously. MSR Dev
and Sandlas drew up meticulous plans for mechanical and
electrical integration of the vehicle. Madhavan Nair and
Murthy examined the systems developed by the VSSC
electronics laboratories and engineered them into flight
sub- systems wherever it was possible. US Singh brought
up the first launch ground system, comprising of telemetry,
tele-command, and radar. He also chalked out a detailed
work plan with SHAR for the flight trials. Dr Sundararajan
closely monitored mission objectives and concurrently
updated the systems. Dr Srinivasan, a competent launch
vehicle designer, discharged all my complementary and
supplementary functions as the SLV deputy project
director. He noticed what I had overlooked, heard the
points I failed to listen to, and suggested possibilities that I
had not so much as visualized.
We learned the hard way that the biggest problem of
project management is to achieve a regular and efficient
interfacing between the different individuals and work
centres. Hard work can be set at nought in the absence of
I had the fortune of having YS Rajan from the ISRO
headquarters as my friend in those times. Rajan was (and
is) a universal friend. His friendship embraced with equal
warmth turners, fitters, electricians and drivers as well as
scientists, engineers, contractors and bureaucrats. Today
when the press calls me a 'welder of people', I attribute this
to Rajan. His close interaction with different work centres
created such a harmony in SLV affairs that the fine threads
of individual efforts were woven into a mighty fabric of great
In 1976, my father passed away. He had been in poor
health for quite some time due to his advanced age. The
death of Jallaluddin had also taken a toll on his health and
spirit. He had lost his desire to live, as though after seeing
Jallaluddin return to his divine source, he too had become
eager to return to his.
Whenever I learnt about my father's indifferent health, I
would visit Rameswaram with a good city doctor. Every
time I did so, he would chide me for my unnecessary
concern and lecture me on the expenses incurred on the
doctor. "Your visit is enough for me to get well, why bring a
doctor and spend money on his fees?" he would ask. This
time he had gone beyond the capabilities of any doctor,
care or money. My father Jainulabdeen, who had lived on
Rameswaram island for 102 years, had passed away
leaving behind fifteen grandchildren and one
greatgrandson. He had led an exemplary life. Sitting alone,
on the night after the burial, I remembered a poem written
on the death of Yeats by his friend Auden, and felt as if it
was written for my father:
Earth, receive an honoured guest;
William Yeats is laid to rest:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In the prison of his daysTeach the
free man how to praise.
In worldly terms, it was the death of just another old man.
No public mourning was organized, no flags were lowered
to half-mast, no newspaper carried an obituary for him. He
was not a politician, a scholar, or a businessman. He was a
plain and transparent man. My father pursued the supreme
value, the Good. His life inspired the growth of all that was
benign and angelic, wise and noble.
My father had always reminded me of the legendary
Abou Ben Adhem who, waking one night from a deep
dream of peace, saw an angel writing in a book of gold the
names of those who love the Lord. Abou asked the Angel if
his own name was on the list. The Angel replied in the
negative. Disappointed but still cheerful, Abou said, "Write
my name down as one that loves his fellowmen". The angel
wrote, and vanished. The next night, it came again with a
great wakening light, and showed the names of those
whom the love of God had blessed. And Abou's name was
the first on the list.
I sat for a long time with my mother, but could not speak.
She blessed me in a choked voice when I took leave of her
to return to Thumba. She knew that she was not to leave the
house of her husband, of which she was the custodian, and
I was not to live with her there. Both of us had to live out our
own destinies. Was I too stubborn or was I excessively
preoccupied with the SLV? Should I not have forgotten for a
while my own affairs in order to listen to her? I regretfully
realised this only when she passed away soon afterwards.
The SLV-3 Apogee rocket, developed as a common
upper stage with Diamont, scheduled to be flight tested in
France was mired in a series of knotty problems. I had to
rush to France to sort them out. Before I could depart, late
in the afternoon, I was informed that my mother had passed
away. I took the first available bus to Nagarcoil. From there,
I travelled to Rameswaram spending a whole night in the
train and performed the last rites the next morning. Both the
people who had formed me had left for their heavenly
abode. The departed had reached the end of their journey.
The rest of us had to continue walking the weary road and
life had to go on. I prayed in the mosque my father had
once taken me to every evening. I told Him that my mother
could not have lived longer in the world without the care and
love of her husband, and therefore had preferred to join
him. I begged His forgiveness. "They carried out the task I
designed for them with great care, dedication and honesty
and came back to me. Why are you mourning their day of
accomplishment? Concentrate on the assignments that lie
before you, and proclaim my glory through your deeds!"
Nobody had said these words, but I heard them loud and
clear. An inspiring aphorism in the Qur'an on the passing
away of souls filled my mind: "Your wealth and children are
only a temptation whereas: Allah! with Him is an eternal
award." I came out of the mosque with my mind at peace
and proceeded to the railway station. I always remember
that when the call for namaz sounded, our home would
transform into a small mosque. My father and my mother
leading, and their children and grandchildren following.
The next morning I was back at Thumba, physically
exhausted, emotionally shattered, but determined to fulfill
our ambition of flying an Indian rocket motor on foreign soil.
On my return from France, after successfully testing the
SLV-3 apogee motor, Dr Brahm Prakash informed me one
day about the arrival of Wernher von Braun. Everybody
working in rocketry knows of von Braun, who made the
lethal V-2 missiles that devastated London in the Second
World War. In the final stages of the War, von Braun was
captured by the Allied Forces. As a tribute to his genius,
von Braun was given a top position in the rocketry
programme at NASA. Working for the US Army, von Braun
produced the landmark Jupiter missile, which was the first
IRBM with a 3000 km range. When I was asked by Dr
Brahm Prakash to receive von Braun at Madras and escort
him to Thumba, I was naturally excited.
The V-2 missile (an abbreviation of the German word
Vergeltungswaffe) was by far the greatest single
achievement in the history of rockets and missiles. It was
the culmination of the efforts made by von Braun and his
team in the VFR (Society for Space Flight) in the 1920s.
What had begun as a civilian effort soon became an official
army one, and von Braun became the technical director of
the German Missile Laboratory at Kummersdorf. The first
V-2 missile was first tested unsuccessfully in June 1942. It
toppled over on to its side and exploded. But on 16 August
1942, it became the first missile to exceed the speed of
sound. Under the supervision of von Braun, more than
10,000 V-2 missiles were produced between April and
October 1944 at the gigantic underground production unit
near Nordhausen in Germany. That I would be travelling
with this man - a scientist, a designer, a production
engineer, an administrator, a technology manager all rolled
into one - what more could I have asked for?
We flew in an Avro aircraft which took around ninety
minutes from Madras to Trivandrum. von Braun asked me
about our work and listened as if he was just another
student of rocketry. I never expected the father of modern
rocketry to be so humble, receptive and encouraging. He
made me feel comfortable right through the flight. It was
hard to imagine that I was talking to a giant of missile
systems, as he was so self-effacing.
He observed that the length to diameter L/D ratio of the
SLV3, which was designed to be 22 was on the higher side
and cautioned me about the aero-elastic problems which
must be avoided during flight.
Having spent the major part of his working life in
Germany, how did he feel in America? I asked this of von
Braun who had become a cult figure in the States after
creating the Saturn rocket in the Apollo mission which put
man on the moon. "America is a country of great
possibilities, but they look upon everything un-American
with suspicion and contempt. They suffer from a deep-
rooted NIH - Not Invented Here - complex and look down
on alien technologies. If you want to do anything in rocketry,
do it yourself," von Braun advised me. He commented,
"SLV-3 is a genuine Indian design and you may be having
your own troubles. But you should always remember that we
don't just build on successes, we also build on failures."
On the topic of the inevitable hard work that goes with
rocket development and the degree of commitment
involved, he smiled and said with a glint of mischief in his
eyes, "Hard work is not enough in rocketry. It is not a sport
where mere hard work can fetch you honours. Here, not
only do you have to have a goal but you have to have
strategies to achieve it as fast as possible."
"Total commitment is not just hard work, it is total
involvement. Building a rock wall is back-breaking work.
There are some people who build rock walls all their lives.
And when they die, there are miles of walls, mute
testimonials to how hard those people had worked."
He continued, "But there are other men who while
placing one rock on top of another have a vision in their
minds, a goal. It may be a terrace with roses climbing over
the rock walls and chairs set out for lazy summer days. Or
the rock wall may enclose an apple orchard or mark a
boundary. When they finish, they have more than a wall. It is
the goal that makes the difference. Do not make rocketry
your profession, your livelihood - make it your religion, your
mission." Did I see something of Prof. Vikram Sarabhai in
von Braun? It made me happy to think so.
With three deaths in the family in as many successive
years, I needed total commitment to my work in order to
keep performing. I wanted to throw all my being into the
creation of the SLV. I felt as if I had discovered the path I
was meant to follow, God's mission for me and my purpose
on His earth. During this period, it was as though I had
pushed a hold button - no badminton in the evenings, no
more weekends or holidays, no family, no relations, not
even any friends outside the SLV circle.
To succeed in your mission, you must have single-
minded devotion to your goal. Individuals like myself are
often called 'workaholics'. I question this term because that
implies a pathological condition or an illness. If I do that
which I desire more than anything else in the world and
which makes me happy, such work can never be an
aberration. Words from the twenty-sixth Psalm come to
mind while I work: "Examine me, O Lord, and prove me."
Total commitment is a crucial quality for those who want
to reach the very top of their profession. The desire to work
at optimum capacity leaves hardly any room for anything
else. I have had people with me who would scoff at the 40-
hours-a-week job they were being paid for. I have known
others who used to work 60, 80 and even 100 hours a
week because they found their work exciting and
rewarding. Total commitment is the common denominator
among all successful men and women. Are you able to
manage the stresses you encounter in your life? The
difference between an energetic and a confused person is
the difference in the way their minds handle their
experiences. Man needs his difficulties because they are
necessary to enjoy success. All of us carry some sort of a
super-intelligence within us. Let it be stimulated to enable
us to examine our deepest thoughts, desires, and beliefs.
Once you have done this - charged yourself, as it were,
with your commitment to your work - you also need good
health and boundless energy. Climbing to the top demands
strength, whether to the top of Mount Everest or to the top of
your career. People are born with different energy reserves
and the one who tires first and burns out easily will do well
to reorganize his or her life at the earliest.
In 1979, a six-member team was preparing the flight
version of a complex second stage control system for static
test and evaluation. The team was in countdown mode at T-
15 minutes (15 minutes before the test). One of the twelve
valves did not respond during checkout. Anxiety drove the
members of the team to the test site to look into the
problem. Suddenly the oxidizer tank, filled with red fuming
nitric acid (RFNA), burst, causing severe acid burns to the
team members. It was a very traumatic experience to see
the suffering of the injured. Kurup and I rushed to the
Trivandrum Medical College Hospital and begged to have
our colleagues admitted, as six beds were not available in
the hospital at that point of time.
Sivaramakrishnan Nair was one among the six persons
injured. The acid had burned his body at a number of
places. By the time we got a bed in the hospital, he was in
severe pain. I kept vigil at his bedside. Around 3 o' clock in
the morning, Sivarama-krishnan regained consciousness.
His first words expressed regret over the mishap and
assured me that he would make up the slippage in
schedules caused by the accident. His sincerity and
optimism, even in the midst of such severe pain, impressed
Men like Sivaramakrishnan are a breed apart. They are
the strivers, always reaching higher than the last time. And
with their social and family life welded to their dream, they
find the rewards of their drive overwhelming - the inherent
joy of being in flow. This event greatly enhanced my
confidence in my team; a team that would stand like a rock
in success and failure.
I have used the word 'flow' at many places without really
elaborating its meaning. What is this flow? And what are
these joys? I could call them moments of magic. I see an
analogy between these moments and the high that you
experience when you play badminton or go jogging. Flow is
a sensation we experience when we act with total
involvement. During flow, action follows action according to
an internal logic that seems to need no conscious
intervention on the part of the worker. There is no hurry;
there are no distracting demands on one's attention. The
past and the future disappear. So does the distinction
between self and the activity. We had all come under the
current of the SLV flow. Although we were working very
hard we were very relaxed, energetic and fresh. How did it
happen? Who had created this flow?
Perhaps it was the meaningful organization of the
purposes we sought to achieve. We would identify the
broadest possible purpose level and then work towards
developing a feasible target solution from a variety of
alternatives. It was this working backwards to develop a
creative change in the problem solution, that used to put us
When the SLV-3 hardware started emerging, our ability
to concentrate increased markedly. I felt a tremendous
surge of confidence; in complete control over myself and
over the SLV-3 project. Flow is a by-product of controlled
creativity. The first requirement is to work as hard as you
can at something that presents a challenge and is
approved by your heart. It may not be an overwhelming
challenge, but one that stretches you a little, something that
makes you realise that you are performing a task better
today than you did yesterday, or the last time you tried to do
it. Another prerequisite for being in flow is the availability of
a significant span of uninterrupted time. In my experience, it
is difficult to switch into the flow state in less than half an
hour. And it is almost impossible if you are bedevilled by
Is it possible to switch yourself into flow by using some
sort of a conditioning device in much the same way that we
condition ourselves to learn effectively? The answer is yes,
and the secret is to analyse previous occasions when you
have been in flow, because each person has his or her
unique natural frequency which responds to a particular
stimulus. You alone can identify the common denominator
in your case. Once you have isolated this common
denominator, you can set the stage for flow.
I have experienced this state many times, almost every
day of the SLV mission. There have been days in the
laboratory when I have looked up to find the laboratory
empty and realised that it was way past the quitting time.
On other days, my team members and I have been so
caught up in our work that the lunch hour slipped by without
our even being conscious that we were hungry.
Analysing such occasions in retrospect, I find them
similar in the sense that this flow was experienced when the
project was nearing completion, or when the project had
reached that phase when all the necessary data had been
gathered and we were ready to start summing up the
problem, outlining the demands made by conflicting criteria
and the various positions presented by opposing interests
and making our recommendations for action. I also realised
that this tended to happen on days that were relatively quiet
in the office, with no crises or meetings. Such spells
increased steadily in frequency, and the SLV-3 dream was
finally realised in the middle of 1979.
We had scheduled the first experimental flight trial of
SLV-3 for 10 August 1979. The primary goals of the
mission were to realise a fully integrated launch vehicle; to
evaluate on-board systems like stage motors, guidance
and control systems and electronic subsystems; and to
evaluate ground systems, like checkout, tracking, telemetry
and real-time data facilities in launch operations built at the
Sriharikota launch complex. The 23 metre-long, four-stage
SLV rocket weighing 17 tonnes finally took off elegantly at
0758 hours and immediately started following its
Stage I performed to perfection. There was a smooth
transition from this stage to the second stage. We were
spellbound to see our hopes flying in the form of the SLV-3.
Suddenly, the spell was broken. The second stage went out
of control. The flight was terminated after 317 seconds and
the vehicle's remains, including my favourite fourth stage
with the payload splashed into the sea, 560 km off
The incident caused us profound disappointment. I felt a
strange mix of anger and frustration. Suddenly, I felt my legs
become so stiff that they ached. The problem was not with
my body; something was happening in my mind.
The premature death of my hovercraft Nandi, the
abandoning of the RATO, the abortion of the SLV-Diamont
fourth stage - all came alive in a flash, like a long-buried
Phoenix rising from its ashes. Over the years, I had
somehow learned to absorb these aborted endeavours,
had come to terms with them and pursued fresh dreams.
That day, I re-lived each of those setbacks in my deep
"What do you suppose could be the cause of it?"
somebody asked me in the Block House. I tried to find an
answer, but I was too tired to try and think it out, and gave
up the effort as futile. The launch was conducted in the early
morning, preceded by a full night's count-down. Moreover, I
had hardly had any sleep in the past week. Completely
drained - mentally as well as physically - I went straight to
my room and slumped onto the bed.
A gentle touch on my shoulder woke me up. It was late
in the afternoon, almost approaching evening. I saw Dr
Brahm Prakash sitting by my bedside. "What about going
for lunch?" he asked. I was deeply touched by his affection
and concern. I found out later that Dr Brahm Prakash had
come to my room twice before that but had gone away on
finding me asleep. He had waited all that time for me to get
up and have lunch with him. I was sad, but not alone. The
company of Dr Brahm Prakash filled me with a new
confidence. He made light conversation during the meal,
carefully avoiding the SLV-3, but gently providing me

Dr Brahm Prakash helped me endure this difficult
period. In practice, Dr Brahm Prakash employed the front-
line damage control principle: "Just get the fellow home
alive. He'll recover." He drew the entire SLV team close
and demonstrated to me that I was not alone in my sorrow
at the SLV-3's failure. "All your comrades are standing by
you," he said. This gave me vital emotional support,
A post-flight review conducted on 11 August 1979 was
attended by more than seventy scientists. A detailed
technical appraisal of the failure was completed. Later, the
post-flight analysis committee headed by SK Athithan
pinpointed the reasons for the malfunction of the vehicle. It
was established that the mishap occurred because of the
failure of the second stage control system. No control force
was available during the second stage flight due to which
the vehicle became aerodynamically unstable, resulting in
altitude and velocity loss. This caused the vehicle to fall into
the sea even before the other stages could ignite.
Further in-depth analysis of the second-stage failure
identified the reason as the draining of a good amount of
Red Fuming Nitric Acid (RFNA) used as the oxidizer for the
fuel power at that stage. Consequently, when the control
force was demanded, only fuel was injected resulting in
zero force. 'A solenoid valve in the oxidizer tank remaining
open due to contamination after the first command at T-8
minutes', was identified as the reason for the draining of
The findings were presented to Prof. Dhawan at a
meeting of top ISRO scientists and were accepted.
Everybody was convinced by the technical cause-and-
effect sequence presented and there was a general feeling
of satisfaction about the whole exercise of failure-
management measures taken. I was still unconvinced
though and felt restless. To me, the level of responsibility is
measured by one's ability to confront the decision-making
process without any delay or distraction.
On the spur of the moment, I stood up and addressed
Prof. Dhawan, "Sir, even though my friends have technically
justified the failure, I take the responsibility for judging the
RFNA leak detected during the final phase of countdown as
insignificant. As a Mission Director, I should have put the
launch on hold and saved the flight if possible. In a similar
situation abroad, the Mission Director would have lost his
job. I therefore take responsibility for the SLV-3 failure." For
quite some time there was pin-drop silence in the hall. Then
Prof. Dhawan got up and said, "I am going to put Kalam in
orbit!", and left the place signalling that the meeting was
The pursuit of science is a combination of great elation
and great despair. I went over many such episodes in my
mind. Johannes Kepler, whose three orbital laws form the
basis of space research, took nearly 17 years after
formulating the two laws about planetary motion around the
sun, to enunciate his third law which gives the relation
between the size of the elliptical orbit and the length of time
it takes for the planet to go around the sun. How many
failures and frustrations must he have gone through? The
idea that man could land on the moon, developed by the
Russian mathematician Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, was
realised after nearly four decades - and by the United
States, at that. Prof. Chandrasekhar had to wait nearly 50
years before receiving the Nobel Prize for his discovery of
the 'Chandrasekhar Limit', a discovery made while he was
a graduate student at Cambridge in the 1930s. If his work
had been recognized then, it could have led to the
discovery of the Black Hole decades earlier. How many
failures must von Braun have gone through before his
Saturn launch vehicle put man on the moon? These
thoughts helped to give me the ability to withstand
Early in November 1979, Dr Brahm Prakash retired. He
had always been my sheet-anchor in the turbulent waters of
VSSC. His belief in team spirit had inspired the
management pattern for the SLV project, which later
became a blueprint for all scientific projects in the country.
Dr Brahm Prakash was a very wise counsellor who gave
me valuable guidance whenever I deviated from my
Dr Brahm Prakash not only reinforced the traits which I
had acquired from Prof. Sarabhai, but also helped me give
them new dimensions. He always cautioned me against
haste. "Big scientific projects are like mountains, which
should be climbed with as little effort as possible and
without urgency. The reality of your own nature should
determine your speed. If you become restless, speed up. If
you become tense and highstrung, slow down. You should
climb the mountain in a state of equilibrium. When each
task of your project is not just a means to an end but a
unique event in itself, then you are doing it well," he would
tell me. The echo of Dr Brahm Prakash's advice could be
heard in Emerson's poem on Brahma:
If the red slayer think he slays,
Or, if the slain think he is slain,
They know not well, the subtle ways
I keep, and pass, and turn again.
To live only for some unknown future is superficial. It is
like climbing a mountain to reach the peak without
experiencing its sides. The sides of the mountain sustain
life, not the peak. This is where things grow, experience is
gained, and technologies are mastered. The importance of
the peak lies only in the fact that it defines the sides. So I
went on towards the top, but always experiencing the sides.
I had a long way to go but I was in no hurry. I went in little
steps - just one step after another - but each step towards
At every stage, the SLV-3 team was blessed with some
extraordinarily courageous people. Along with Sudhakar
and Sivaramakrishnan, there was also Sivakaminathan. He
was entrusted with bringing the C-Band transponder from
Trivandrum to SHAR for integration with the SLV-3. The
transponder is a device fitted with the rocket system to give
the radar signals which are powerful enough to help it track
the vehicle from the take-off site to the final impact point.
The SLV-3 launch schedule was dependent on the arrival
and integration of this equipment. On landing at the Madras
airport, the aircraft which Sivakami was travelling in
skidded and overshot the runway. Dense smoke engulfed
the aircraft. Everyone jumped out of the aircraft through
emergency exits, and desperately fought to save
themselves - all except Sivakami, who stayed in the aircraft
till he removed the transponder from his baggage. He was
among the last few persons, the others being mostly aircraft
crew, to emerge from the smoke and he was hugging the
transponder close to his chest.
Another incident from those days that I recall clearly
relates to Prof. Dhawan's visit to the SLV-3 assembly
building. Prof. Dhawan, Madhavan Nair and I were
discussing some finer aspects of the SLV-3 integration.
The vehicle was kept on the launcher in a horizontal
position. When we were moving around and examining the
readiness of the integrated hardware, I noticed the
presence of big water-ports for extinguishing fire in case of
an accident. For some reason, I felt uncomfortable at the
sight of the ports facing the SLV-3 on the launcher. I
suggested to Madhavan Nair that we could rotate the port
so that they were apart by a full 180o. This would prevent
the freak possibility of water gushing out and damaging the
rocket. To our surprise, within minutes of Madhavan Nair
getting the ports reversed, powerful water jets gushed out
of the ports. The Vehicle Safety Officer had ensured the
functioning of the fire-fighting system without realising that it
could have wrecked the entire rocket. This was a lesson in
foresight. Or did we have divine protection?
On 17 July 1980, 30 hours before the launch of the
second SLV-3, the newspapers were filled with all kinds of
predictions. One of the newspapers reported, "The Project
Director is missing and could not be contacted." Many
reports preferred to trace the history of the first SLV3 flight,
and recalled how the third stage had failed to ignite
because of lack of fuel and the rocket had nosedived into
the ocean. Some highlighted SLV-3's possible military
implications in terms of acquiring the capability for building
IRBMs. Some were a general prognosis of all that ailed our
country and related it to the SLV-3. I knew that the next
day's launch was going to decide the future of the Indian
space programme. In fact, to put it simply, the eyes of the
whole nation were on us.
In the early hours of the next day, 18 July 1980 - at 0803
hrs to be precise, India's first Satellite Launch Vehicle,
SLV-3 lifted off from SHAR. At 600 seconds before take-
off, I saw the computer displaying data about stage IV
giving the required velocity to the Rohini Satellite (carried
as payload) to enter its orbit. Within the next two minutes,
Rohini was set into motion in a low earth orbit. I spoke, in
the midst of screeching decibels, the most important words
I had ever uttered in my life, "Mission Director calling all
stations. Stand by for an important announcement. All
stages performed to mission requirements. The fourth
stage apogee motor has given the required velocity to put
Rohini Satellite into orbit". There were happy cries
everywhere. When I came out of the Block House, I was
lifted onto the shoulders of my jubilant colleagues and
carried in a procession.
The whole nation was excited. India had made its entry
into the small group of nations which possessed satellite
launch capability. Newspapers carried news of the event in
their headlines. Radio and television stations aired special
programmes. Parliament greeted the achievement with the
thumping of desks. It was both the culmination of a national
dream, and the beginning of a very important phase in our
nation's history. Prof. Satish Dhawan, Chairman ISRO,
threw his customary guardedness to the winds and
announced that it was now well within our ability to explore
space. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi cabled her
congratulations. But the most important reaction was that of
the Indian scientific community - everybody was proud of
this hundred per cent indigenous effort.
I experienced mixed feelings. I was happy to achieve
the success which had been evading me for the past two
decades, but I was sad because the people who had
inspired me were no longer there to share my joy - my
father, my brother-in-law Jallaluddin, and Prof. Sarabhai.
The credit for the successful SLV-3 flight goes, first, to
the giants of the Indian space programme, Prof. Sarabhai
in particular, who had preceded this effort; next to the
hundreds of VSSC personnel who had through sheer will-
power proved the mettle of our countrymen and also, not
least, to Prof. Dhawan and Dr Brahm Prakash, who had led
We had a late dinner that evening. Gradually, the din
and clatter of the celebrations calmed down. I retired to my
bed with almost no energy left. Through the open window, I
could see the moon among the clouds. The sea breeze
seemed to reflect the buoyancy of the mood on Sriharikota
Within a month of the SLV-3 success, I visited the Nehru
Science Centre in Bombay for a day, in response to an
invitation to share my experiences with the SLV-3. There, I
received a telephone call from Prof. Dhawan in Delhi,
asking me to join him the next morning. We were to meet
the Prime Minister, Mrs Indira Gandhi. My hosts at the
Nehru Centre were kind enough to arrange my ticket to
Delhi, but I had a small problem. It had to do with my
clothes. I was dressed casually as is my wont and wearing
slippers - not, by any standards of etiquette, suitable attire
in which to meet the Prime Minister! When I told Prof.
Dhawan about this problem, he told me not to worry about
my dress. "You are beautifully clothed in your success," he
Prof. Dhawan and I arrived at the Parliament House
Annexe the next morning. A meeting of the Parliamentary
Panel on Science & Technology chaired by the Prime
Minister was scheduled. There were about 30 Members of
the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha in the room, which was lit
by a majestic chandelier. Prof. MGK Menon and Dr Nag
Chaudhuri were also present. Shrimati Gandhi spoke to the
Members about the success of the SLV-3 and lauded our
achievement. Prof. Dhawan thanked the gathering for the
encouragement given by them to space research in the
country and expressed the gratitude of the ISRO scientists
and engineers. Suddenly, I saw Shrimati Gandhi smiling at
me as she said, "Kalam! We would like to hear you speak."
I was surprised by the request as Prof. Dhawan had
already addressed the gathering.
Hesitantly, I rose and responded, "I am indeed
honoured to be in this great gathering of nation-builders. I
only know how to build a rocket system in our country, which
would inject a satellite, built in our country, by imparting to it
a velocity of 25,000 km per hour." There was thunderous
applause. I thanked the members for giving us an
opportunity to work on a project like the SLV-3 and prove
the scientific strength of our country. The entire room was
Now that Project SLV-3 had been successfully
completed, VSSC had to re-organize its resources and
redefine its goals. I wanted to be relieved of the project
activities, and consequently Ved Prakash Sandlas from my
team was made the Project Director for the SLV-3
Continuation Project, which aimed at making operational
satellite launch vehicles of a similar class. With a view to
upgrade the SLV-3 by means of certain technological
innovations, the development of Augmented Satellite
Launch Vehicles (ASLVs) had been on the cards for some
time. The aim was to enhance the SLV-3 payload
capability from 40 kg to 150 kg. MSR Dev from my team
was appointed Project Director ASLV. Then, to reach the
sun-synchronous orbit (900 km), a PSLV was to be made.
The Geo Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) was also
envisaged, though as a distant dream. I took up the
position of Director, Aerospace Dynamics and Design
Group, so that I could configure the forthcoming launch
vehicles and technology development.
The existing VSSC infrastructure was inadequate to
handle the size and weight of the future launch vehicle
systems and the implementation of all these projects was
going to require highly specialized facilities. New sites
were identified for the expanded activities of VSSC, at
Vattiyoorkavu and Valiamala. Dr Srinivasan drew up a
detailed plan of the facilities. Meanwhile, I carried out an
analysis of the application of SLV-3 and its variants with
Sivathanu Pillai, and compared the existing launch vehicles
of the world for missile applications. We established that
the SLV-3 solid rocket systems would meet the national
requirements of payload delivery vehicles for short and
intermediate ranges (4000 km). We contended that the
development of one additional solid booster of 1.8 m
diameter with 36 tonnes of propellant along with SLV-3
subsystems would meet the ICBM requirement (above
5000 km for a 1000 kg payload). This proposal was,
however, never considered. It nevertheless paved the way
for the formulation of the Re-entry Experiment (REX) which,
much later on, became Agni.
The next SLV-3 flight, SLV3-D1, took off on 31 May
1981. I witnessed this flight from the visitors' gallery. This
was the first time I witnessed a launch from outside the
Control Centre. The unpalatable truth I had to face was that
by becoming the focus of media attention, I had aroused
envy among some of my senior colleagues, all of whom had
equally contributed to the success of SLV-3. Was I hurt at
the coldness of the new environment? Perhaps yes, but I
was willing to accept what I couldn't change.
I have never lived off the profits of others' minds. My life,
in keeping with my nature, has never been that of a ruthless
achiever. The SLV-3 was made not by force and
manipulation, but through consistent collective effort. Then
why this sense of bitterness? Was it peculiar to the VSSC
top level or a universal reality? As a scientist, I was trained
to reason out reality. In science, reality is that which exists.
And because this bitterness was real, I had to reason it out.
But can these things be reasoned out?
Were my post-SLV experiences leading me into a
critical situation? Yes and no. Yes, because the glory of
SLV-3 had not gone to everyone who deserved it - but
hardly anything could have been done about that. No,
because a situation can be considered critical for a person
only when realisation of the internal necessity becomes
impossible. And that certainly was not the case. In fact, the
concept of conflict is built upon this basic idea. In
retrospect, I can only say that I was fully aware of a great
need for actualization and renewal.
In January 1981, I was invited by Dr Bhagiratha Rao of
the High Altitude Laboratory (now the Defence Electronics
Applications Laboratory (DEAL)), Dehra Dun to give a
lecture on the SLV-3. The renowned nuclear scientist, Prof.
Raja Ramanna, whom I had always admired, and who was
then the Scientific Adviser to the Defence Minister,
presided over the gathering. He spoke on India's efforts in
generating nuclear energy and the challenge in conducting
the first nuclear test for peaceful purposes. As I had been
so closely involved with SLV-3, it was natural that I was
soon in full spate about it. Later, Prof. Raja Ramanna
invited me for a private meeting over tea.
The first thing that struck me when I met Prof. Ramanna
was his genuine pleasure at meeting me. There was an
eagerness in his talk, an immediate, sympathetic
friendliness, accompanied by quick, graceful movements.
The evening brought back memories of my first meeting
with Prof. Sarabhai - as if it was yesterday. The world of
Prof. Sarabhai was internally simple and externally easy.
Each of us working with him was driven by a single-minded
need to create, and lived under conditions which made the
object of that need directly accessible. Sarabhai's world
was tailor-made to our dreams. It had neither too much nor
too little of anything needed by any one of us. We could
divide it by our requirements without a remainder.
My world, by now, had no simplicity left in it. It had
become an internally complex and externally difficult world.
My efforts in rocketry and in achieving the goal of making
indigenous rockets were impeded by external obstacles
and complicated by internal wavering. I was aware that it
required a special effort of the will to sustain my trajectory.
The coordination of my present with my past had already
been jeopardised. The coordination of my present with my
future was uppermost in my mind when I went to have tea
He did not take long to come to the point. The Devil
Missile programme had been shelved in spite of
tremendous achievements made by Narayanan and his
team at DRDL. The entire programme of military rockets
was reeling under a persistent apathy. The DRDO needed
somebody to take command of their missile programmes
which had been stuck at the drawing board and static test
bed stages for quite a while. Prof. Ramanna asked me if I
would like to join DRDL and shoulder the responsibility of
shaping their Guided Missile Development Programme
(GMDP). Prof. Ramanna's proposal evoked a mixture of
When again would I have such an opportunity to
consolidate all our knowledge of rocketry and apply it?
I felt honoured by the esteem in which Prof. Ramanna
held me. He had been the guiding spirit behind the
Pokharan nuclear test, and I was thrilled by the impact he
had helped create on the outside world about India's
technical competence. I knew I would not be able to refuse
him. Prof. Ramanna advised me to talk to Prof. Dhawan on
this issue so that he could work out the modalities of my
transfer from ISRO to DRDL.
I met Prof. Dhawan on 14 January 1981. He gave me a
patient hearing, with his typical penchant for weighing
everything carefully to make sure he didn't miss a point. A
markedly pleasant expression came to his face. He said, "I
am pleased with their appraisal of my man's work". He then
smiled. I have never met anyone with a smile quite like Prof.
Dhawan's - a soft white cloud - you could picture it in any
shape you wanted to.
I wondered how I should proceed. "Should I formally
apply for the post so that DRDL could send the
appointment order?" I enquired of Prof. Dhawan. "No. Don't
pressurise them. Let me talk to the top-level management
during my next visit to New Delhi," Prof. Dhawan said. "I
know you have always had one foot in DRDO, now your
whole centre of gravity seems to have shifted towards
them." Perhaps what Prof. Dhawan was telling me had an
element of truth in it, but my heart had always been at ISRO.
Was he really unaware of that?
Republic Day, 1981 brought with it a pleasant surprise.
On the evening of 25 January, Mahadevan, Secretary to
Prof. UR Rao, rang up from Delhi to inform me about the
Home Ministry announcement about the conferment of the
Padma Bhushan award on me. The next important call was
from Prof. Dhawan to congrat-ulate me. I felt blissfully
elated as it was from my guru. I rejoiced with Prof. Dhawan
at his receiving the Padma Vibhushan and I congratulated
him wholeheartedly. I then rang up Dr Brahm Prakash and
thanked him. Dr Brahm Prakash chided me for the formality
and said, "I feel as if my son has got the award." I was so
deeply touched by Dr Brahm Prakash's affection that I
could no longer keep my emotions in check.
I filled my room with the music of Bismillah Khan's
shehnai. The music took me to another time, another place.
I visited Rameswaram and hugged my mother. My father
ran his caring fingers through my hair. My mentor,
Jallaluddin, announced the news to the crowd gathered on
Mosque Street. My sister, Zohara, prepared special sweets
for me. Pakshi Lakshmana Sastry put a tilak on my
forehead. Fr. Solomon blessed me holding the holy cross. I
saw Prof. Sarabhai smiling with a sense of achievement -
the sapling which he had planted twenty years ago had
finally grown into a tree whose fruits were being
appreciated by the people of India.
My Padma Bhushan evoked mixed reactions at VSSC.
While there were some who shared my happiness, there
were others who felt I was being unduly singled out for
recognition. Some of my close associates turned envious.
Why do some people fail to see the great values of life
because of sadly twisted thought processes? Happiness,
satisfaction, and success in life depend on making the right
choices, the winning choices. There are forces in life
working for you and against you. One must distinguish the
beneficial forces from the malevolent ones and choose
An inner voice told me that the time had come for a long
felt, but ignored, need for renewal. Let me clean my slate
and write new 'sums'. Were the earlier sums done
correctly? Evaluating one's own progress in life is not an
easy task. Here the student has to set his own questions,
seek his own answers and evaluate them to his own
satisfaction. Judgement aside, eighteen years at ISRO was
too long a stay to leave without pain. As for my afflicted
friends, the lines by Lewis Carroll seemed very
You may charge me with murder -
Or want of sense
(We are all of us weak at times):
But the slightest approach to a false pretence
Was never among my crimes!
[ 1981 - 1991 ]
Let craft, ambition, spite,
Be quenched in Reason's night, Till weakness turn to
Till what is dark be light,
Till what is wrong be right!

minor tussle over my services occurred at this time,
between ISRO, which was a little hesitant to relieve me, and
DRDO, which wanted to take me in. Many months went by,
many letters were exchanged between ISRO and
DRDO; and meetings were held in the secretariats of the
Defence R&D establishment and the Department of Space
to precipitate a mutually convenient course of action.
Meanwhile, Prof. Ramanna retired from the office of the
Scientific Advisor to Defence Minister. Dr VS
Arunachalam, till then Director of the Defence Metallurgical
Research Laboratory (DMRL) in Hyderabad, succeeded
Prof. Ramanna. Dr Arunachalam was known for his
confidence, and he cared little for the intricacies and
nuances of the scientific bureaucracy. Meanwhile, I
understand that the Defence Minister at that time, R
Venkataraman discussed the matter of my taking over the
missile laboratory with Prof. Dhawan. Prof. Dhawan also
seemed to be waiting for a decisive step at the highest
level in the Defence Ministry. Overcoming the niggling
doubts that had caused delays over the past year, the
decision to appoint me Director, DRDL was finally taken in
Prof. Dhawan used to visit my room in the ISRO
headquarters and spend many hours in evolving space
launch vehicle projects. It was a great privilege to work with
such a great scientist. Before I left ISRO, Prof. Dhawan
asked me to give a talk on the Space Programme Profile in
India by the year 2000. Almost the entire ISRO
management and staff attended my talk, which was by way
of a farewell meeting.
I had met Dr VS Arunachalam in 1976, when I visited
DMRL in connection with the aluminium alloy investment
casting for the SLV inertial guidance platform. Taking it as
a personal challenge, Dr Arunachalam had the investment
casting, the first of its kind in the country, made in the
incredibly short time of two months. His youthful energy and
enthusiasm never failed to amaze me. This young
metallurgist had within a short span of time lifted the
science of metal-making to the technology of metal-forming
and then to the art of alloy development. With a tall and
elegant figure, Dr Arunachalam was like an electrically
charged dynamo himself. I found him an unusually friendly
person with a forceful manner, as well as an excellent
I visited DRDL in April 1982 to acquaint myself with my
potential work site. The Director of DRDL then, SL Bansal,
took me around and introduced me to the senior scientists
in the laboratory. DRDL was working on five staff projects
and sixteen competence build-up projects. They were also
involved in several technology-oriented activities with a
view to gain lead time for the development of indigenous
missile systems in future. I was particularly impressed by
their efforts on the twin 30-ton Liquid Propellant Rocket
Meanwhile, Anna University, Madras, conferred the
honorary degree of Doctor of Science on me. It had been
nearly twenty years since I had acquired my degree in
aeronautical engineering. I was happy that Anna University
had recognized my efforts in the field of rocketry, but what
pleased me most was the recognition of the value of our
work in academic circles. To my delight, the honorary
doctorate degree was awarded at a convocation presided
over by Prof. Raja Ramanna.
I joined DRDL on 1 June, 1982. Very soon, I realized
that this laboratory was still haunted by the winding up of the
Devil missile project. Many excellent professionals had not
yet recovered from the disappointment. People outside the
scientific world may find it difficult to comprehend how a
scientist feels when the umbilical cord to his work is
suddenly snapped, for reasons totally alien to his
understanding and interests. The general mood and work
tempo at DRDL reminded me of Samuel Taylor
Coleridge's poem The Rime of the Ancient Mariner:
Day after day, day after day,
We stuck, nor breath, nor motion;
As idle as a painted ship
Upon a painted ocean.
I found almost all my senior colleagues living with the
pain of dashed hopes. There was a widespread feeling that
the scientists of this laboratory had been cheated by the
senior officials in the Ministry of Defence. It was clear to me
that the burial of the Devil was essential for the rise of hope
When about a month later, Admiral OS Dawson, then
the Chief of Naval Staff, visited DRDL, I used it as an
opportunity to make a point with my team. The Tactical
Core Vehicle (TCV) project had been hanging fire for quite
some time. It was conceived as a single core vehicle with
certain common subsystems to meet the requirements of
the services for a quick reaction Surface-to-Air Missile, an
anti-radiation Air-to-Surface Missile which could be
launched from helicopters or fixed wing aircraft. I
emphasized the sea-skimming role of the core vehicle to
Admiral Dawson. I focussed not on its technical intricacies,
but on its battlefield capabilities; and I highlighted the
production plans. The message was loud and clear to my
new associates - do not make anything which you cannot
sell later and do not spend your life on making one thing
only. Missile development is a multi-dimensional business
- if you remain in any one dimension for a long time, you
My initial few months at DRDL were largely interactive. I
had read at St. Joseph's that an electron may appear as a
particle or wave depending on how you look at it. If you ask
a particle question, it will give you a particle answer; if you
ask a wave question, it will give you a wave answer. I not
only described and explained our goals, but also made
them an interplay between our work and ourselves. I still
recall quoting Ronald Fischer at one of the meetings, "The
sweetness we taste in a piece of sugar is neither a
property of the sugar nor a property of ourselves. We are
producing the experience of sweetness in the process of
interacting with the sugar."
Very good work on a Surface-to-Surface missile with a
vertical riseturn straight line climb-ballistic path had been
done by that time. I was astonished to see the
determination of the DRDL workforce, who, in spite of the
premature winding up of their earlier projects, were eager
to go ahead. I arranged reviews for its various subsystems,
to arrive at precise specifications. To the horror of many
old-timers in DRDO, I started inviting people from the Indian
Institute of Science, Indian Institutes of Technology, Council
for Scientific and Industrial Research, Tata Institute of
Fundamental Research, and many other educational
institutions where related experts could be found. I felt that
the stuffy work centres of DRDL needed a breath of fresh
air. Once we opened the windows wide, the light of
scientific talent began to pour in. Once more, Coleridge's
Ancient Mariner came to mind: "Swiftly, swiftly flew the
ship,\ Riding gently the oncoming tide."
Sometime in the beginning of 1983, Prof. Dhawan
visited DRDL. I reminded him of his own advice to me
almost a decade ago: "You have to dream before your
dreams can come true. Some people stride towards
whatever it is that they want in life; others shuffle their feet
and never get started because they do not know what they
want - and do not know how to find it either." ISRO was
lucky to have had Prof. Sarabhai and Prof. Dhawan at the
helm - leaders who elucidated their goals, made their
missions larger than their lives, and could then inspire their
entire workforce. DRDL had not been so lucky. This
excellent laboratory played a truncated role that did not
reflect its existing or potential capabilities or even fulfill the
expectations in South Block. I told Prof. Dhawan about the
highly professional, but slightly bewildered team I had. Prof.
Dhawan responded with his characteristic broad smile
which could be interpreted in any way one chose.
In order to accelerate the pace of R&D activities at
DRDL, it was imperative that decisions on vital scientific,
technical and technological problems be taken quickly.
Throughout my career I had zealously pursued openness in
scientific matters. I had seen from very close quarters the
decay and disintegration that go with management through
closed-door consultations and secret manipulations. I
always despised and resisted such efforts. So the first
major decision which we took was to create a forum of
senior scientists where important matters could be
Plate 9 The twin-engine indigenous hovercraft
prototype Nandi developed at ADE, Bangalore. As
inventor and pilot, I took my rightful place at the
Plate 10 The Christian community in Thumba very
graciously gave up this beautiful Church to house the
first unit of the Space Research Centre.
Plate 11 With Prof Vikram Sarabhai, a great
visionary and the master planner behind India's
Missile Development programme, at Thumba
Plate 12 Two gurus of Indian Space Research who
mentored and gently guided the young scientists -
Prof Satish Dhawan and Dr Brahm Prakash - at one
of the SLV-3 review meetings.
Plate 13 A presentation by a member of my SLV-3
team. In an unusual move, I made each of them
present their portion of the work - my idea of project
Plate 14 Dr Brahm Prakash inspecting SLV-3 in its
final phase of integration. He helped me deal with
subsequent frustrations in its launching and
consoled me when I was at my lowest ebb.
Plate 15 Prof Satish Dhawan and I explaining SLV-
3 results to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi.
Plate 16 SLV-3 on the launch pad. This gave us
Plate 17 Receiving the Padma Bushan from Dr
Neelam Sanjeeva Reddy, then President of India.
Plate 18 Successful launch of Prithvi,
the surface-to-surface weapons system.
Plate 19 Agni on
the launch pad, my long-cherished dream.
Nothing to be discouraged! We have
postponed it again because we want
to be absolutely certain!
Plate 20 One of the cartoons in the media after the
failure of the first two Agni launches.
Plate 21 Many a slip between the cup and the lip... .
Plate 22 Being carried by a jubilant crowd after the
successful launch of Agni.
Plate 23 Receiving the Bharat Ratna from President
Plate 24 With three Service Chiefs. To my left is
Admiral VS Shekhawat, on his right is General BC
Joshi, and Air Chief Marshal SK Kaul.
and debated as a collective endeavour. Thus, a high
level body called the Missile Technology Committee was
formed within DRDL. The concept of management by
participation was evoked and earnest efforts were made to
involve middle-level scientists and engineers in the
management activities of the laboratory.
Days of debate and weeks of thinking finally culminated
in the longterm 'Guided Missile Development Programme'.
I had read somewhere, "Know where you are going. The
great thing in the world is not knowing so much where we
stand, as in what direction we are moving." What if we did
not have the technological might of the Western countries,
we knew we had to attain that might, and this determination
was our driving force. To draw up a clear and well-defined
missile development programme for the production of
indigenous missiles, a committee was constituted under
my chairmanship. The members were ZP Marshall, then the
Chief of Bharat Dynamics Limited, Hyderabad, NR Iyer, AK
Kapoor and KS Venkataraman. We drafted a paper for the
perusal of the Cabinet Committee for Political Affairs
(CCPA). The paper was given its final shape after
consulting the representatives of the three Defence
Services. We estimated an expenditure of about Rs 390
crores, spread over a period of twelve years.
Development programmes often get stuck by the time
they reach the production stage, mainly because of lack of
funding. We wanted to get funds to develop and produce
two missiles - a low-level quick reaction Tactical Core
Vehicle and a Medium Range Surface-to-Surface Weapon
System. We planned to make a surface-to-air medium
range weapon system with multi-target handling capability
during the second phase. DRDL had been known for its
pioneering work in the field of anti-tank missiles. We
proposed to develop a third generation anti-tank guided
missile having 'fire-and-forget' capabilities. All my
colleagues were pleased with the proposal. They saw an
opportunity to pursue afresh activities initiated long ago.
But I was not entirely satisfied. I longed to revive my buried
dream of a Re-entry Experiment Launch Vehicle (REX). I
persuaded my colleagues to take up a technology
development project to generate data for use in the design
of heat shields. These shields were required for building up
capability to make longrange missiles in the future.
I made a presentation in the South Block. The
presentation was presided over by the Defence Minister of
the time R Venkataraman, and attended by the three
Service Chiefs: General Krishna Rao, Air Chief Marshal
Dilbagh Singh and Admiral Dawson. The Cabinet
Secretary, Krishna Rao Sahib, Defence Secretary, SM
Ghosh and Secretary, Expenditure, R Ganapathy were
present. Everyone seemed to have all sorts of doubts -
about our capabilities, about the feasibility and availability
of required technological infrastructure, about the viability,
the schedule and cost. Dr Arunachalam stood by me like a
rock throughout the entire question-answer session.
Members were skeptical and apprehensive of drift - which
they felt was common among scientists. Although some
questioned our ambitious proposal, everyone, even the
doubting Thomases, were very excited about the idea of
India having her own missile systems. In the end, we were
asked by Defence Minister Venkataraman to meet him in
the evening, about three hours later.
We spent the intervening time working on permutations
and combinations. If they sanctioned only Rs 100 crores,
how would we allocate it? Suppose they gave us Rs 200
how would we allocate it? Suppose they gave us Rs 200
crores, then what would we do? When we met the Defence
Minister in the evening, I had a hunch we were going to get
some funds at any rate. But when he suggested that we
launch an integrated guided missile development
programme, instead of making missiles in phases, we
could not believe our ears.
We were quite dumbfounded by the Defence Minister's
suggestion. After a long pause, Dr Arunachalam replied,
"We beg for time to rethink and return, Sir!" "You come
back tomorrow morning please," the Defence Minister
replied. It was reminiscent of Prof. Sarabhai's zeal and
vision. That night, Dr Arunachalam and I laboured together
on reworking our plan.
We worked out some very important extensions and
improvements in our proposal, taking all the variables, such
as design, fabrication, system integration, qualification,
experimental flights, evaluation, updating, user trials,
producibility, quality, reliability, and financial viability into
account. We then integrated them into a single function of
total accountability, in order to meet the needs of the
country's armed forces with an indigenous endeavour. We
worked out the concepts of design, development,
production concurrency and proposed the participation of
user and inspection agencies right from the drawing-board
stage. We also suggested a methodology to achieve state-
of-the-art systems after all the years of developmental
activities. We wanted to deliver contemporary missiles to
our Services and not some outdated inventory of weapons.
It was a very exciting challenge that had been thrown to us.
By the time we finished our work, it was already
morning. Suddenly, at the breakfast table, I remembered
that I was to attend my niece Zameela's wedding at
Rameswaram that evening. I thought it was already too late
to do anything. Even if I could catch the Madras flight later in
the day, how would I reach Rameswaram from there? There
was no air link between Madras and Madurai from where I
could board the evening train to Rameswaram. A pang of
guilt dampened my spirits. Was it fair, I asked myself, to
forget my family commitments and obligations? Zameela
was more like a daughter to me. The thought of missing her
wedding because of professional preoccupations at Delhi
was very distressing. I finished breakfast and left for the
When we met Defence Minister Venkataraman and
showed him our revised proposal, he was visibly pleased.
The proposal of the missile development project had been
turned overnight into the blueprint of an integrated
programme with far-reaching consequences. It would have
wide-ranging technological spinoffs, and was exactly what
the Defence Minister had had in mind the previous evening.
Notwithstanding the great respect I had for the Defence
Minister, I was not really sure if he would clear our entire
proposal. But he did. I was absolutely delighted!
The Defence Minister stood up, signalling that the
meeting was over. Turning to me he said, "Since I brought
you here, I was expecting you to come up with something
like this. I am happy to see your work." In a split second, the
mystery surrounding the clearance of my appointment as
Director DRDL in 1982 was cleared. So it was Defence
Minister Venkataraman who had brought me in! Bowing in
thanks, I turned towards the door when I heard Dr
Arunachalam telling the Minister about Zameela's wedding
being scheduled for that evening at Rameswaram. It
amazed me that Dr Arunachalam should bring up this
matter before the Minister. Why would a person of his
stature, sitting in the all-powerful South Block, be
concerned about a wedding which was to take place on a
far-flung island in a small house on Mosque Street?
I have always had a high regard for Dr Arunachalam. He
has together with a command over language as he
displayed on this occasion, an uncanny presence of mind. I
was overwhelmed when the Defence Minister located an
Air Force helicopter doing sorties between Madras and
Madurai later in the day to take me to Madurai as soon as I
disembarked at Madras from the regular Indian Airlines
flight, which was leaving Delhi in an hour's time. Dr
Arunachalam told me, "You have earned this for your hard
work of the last six months."
Flying towards Madras, I scribbled on the back of my
Who never climbed the weary league -
Can such a foot explore
The Air Force helicopter landed close to the Indian
Airlines aircraft as soon as it arrived from Delhi. Within the
next few minutes I was on my way to Madurai. The Air
Force commandant there was kind enough to take me to
the railway station, where the train to Rameswaram was
just about to roll out of the platform. I was in Rameswaram
well in time for Zameela's wedding. I blessed my brother's
daughter with a father's love.
The Defence Minister put up our proposal before the
Cabinet and saw it through. His recommendations on our
proposal were accepted and an unprecedented amount of
Rs 388 crores was sanctioned for this purpose. Thus was
born India's prestigious Integrated Guided Missile
Development Programme, later abbreviated to IGMDP.
When I presented the government sanction letter before
the Missile Technology Committee at DRDL, they were
enthused with fire and action. The proposed projects were
christened in accordance with the spirit of India's self-
reliance. Thus the Surface-to-Surface weapon system
became Prithvi ("the Earth") and the Tactical Core Vehicle
was called Trishul (the trident of Lord Shiva). The Surface-
to-Air area defence system was named as Akash ("sky")
and the anti-tank missile project Nag ("Cobra"). I gave the
name Agni ("Fire") to my long cherished dream of REX. Dr
Arunachalam came to DRDL and formally launched the
IGMDP on 27 July 1983. It was a great event in which every
single employee of DRDL participated. Everybody who
was somebody in Indian Aerospace Research was invited.
A large number of scientists from other laboratories and
organizations, professors from academic institutions,
representatives of the armed forces, production centres,
and inspection authorities, who were our business partners
now, were present on this occasion. A closed-circuit TV
network had to be pressed into operation to ensure proper
communication between the participants for we had no
single place to accommodate all the invitees. This was the
second most significant day in my career, next only to 18
July 1980, when the SLV-3 had launched Rohini into the

he launch of the IGMDP was like a bright flash on the
Indian scientific firmament. Missile Technology had been
considered the domain of a few selected nations in the
were curious to see how, with what India had at that
point of time, we were going to achieve all that was
promised. The magnitude of the IGMDP was really
unprecedented in the country and the schedules projected
were quite quixotic by the norms and standards prevailing
in the Indian R&D establishments. I was fully aware that
obtaining sanction for the programme could at best be
seen as only ten per cent of the work done. To get it going
would be quite a different matter altogether. The more you
have, the more there is to maintain. Now that we had been
given all the necessary money and freedom to proceed, I
had to take my team forward and fulfill the promises I had
What would be needed to realise this missile
programme, from the design to the deployment stages?
Excellent manpower was available; money had been
sanctioned; and some infrastructure also existed. What
was lacking then? What else does a project need to
succeed apart from these three vital inputs? From my SLV-
3 experience, I thought I knew the answer. The crux was
going to be out mastery over missile technology. I expected
nothing from abroad. Technology is a group activity and we
would need leaders who could not only put their heart and
soul into the missile programme, but also carry along with
them hundreds of other engineers and scientists. We knew
we had to be prepared to encounter numerous
contradictions and procedural absurdities that were
prevalent in the participating laboratories. We would have
to counteract the existing attitudes of our public sector
units, which believed that their performance would never be
tested. The whole system - its people, procedures,
infrastructure - would have to learn to extend itself. We
decided to achieve something that was way beyond our
collective national capability and I, for one, had no illusions
about the fact that unless our teams worked on the basis of
proportion or probability, nothing would be achieved.
The most remarkable thing about DRDL was its large
pool of highly talented people, many of whom were,
unfortunately, full of egotism and rebelliousness.
Unfortunately, they had not even accumulated enough
experience to make them confident about their own
judgement. On the whole, they would discuss matters very
enthusiastically, but would finally accept what a select few
said. They would unquestioningly believe in outside
A particularly interesting person I met in DRDL was AV
Ranga Rao. He was very articulate and had an impressive
personality. His usual garb consisted of a red neck-tie with
a checked coat and loose trousers. He would wear this in
the hot climate of Hyderabad, where even a longsleeved
shirt and shoes are considered an avoidable
inconvenience. With his thick white beard and a pipe
clamped between his teeth, there was a certain aura
around this extremely gifted, but rather egocentric
I consulted Ranga Rao on revamping the existing
management system to achieve an optimum utilization of
human resources. Ranga Rao had a series of meetings
with the scientists sharing our vision of developing
indigenous missile technology and explaining the different
aspects of the IGMDP. After prolonged discussions, we
decided to reorganize the laboratory into a technology-
oriented structure. We needed to accommodate a matrix
type of structure for the execution of various activities
needed for the projects. In less than four months, four
hundred scientists began to work on the missile
During this period, the most important task before me
was the selection of the Project Directors to lead individual
missile projects. We had a very large pool of talent. In fact,
it was a market of plenty. The question was whom to pick -
a go-getter, a planner, a maverick, a dictator or a team
man? I had to get the right type of leader who could clearly
visualize the goal, and channelise the energies of his team
members who would be working at different work centres in
pursuit of their own individual goals.
It was a difficult game, some rules of which I had learnt
while working on ISRO's high priority projects for two
decades. The wrong choice would jeopardise the entire
future of the programme. I had a detailed discussion with a
large number of prospective scientists and engineers. I
wanted these five Project Directors to train another twenty-
five project directors and team leaders of tomorrow.
Many of my senior colleagues - naming them would be
unfair, because it could be only my imagination - tried to
befriend me during this period. I respected their concern for
a lonely man, but avoided any close contacts. Through
loyalty to a friend one can be easily led into doing
something that is not in the best interests of the
Perhaps the main motive behind my isolation was my
desire to escape from the demands of relationships, which
I consider very difficult in comparison to making rockets. All
I desired was to be true to my way of life, to uphold the
science of rocketry in my country and to retire with a clean
conscience. I took quite some time and did a lot of hard
thinking to decide who should lead the five projects. I
examined the working styles of many scientists before
making my decision. I think some of my observations may
A basic aspect of a person's working style is how he
plans and organizes tasks. At one extreme is the cautious
planner, who carefully spells out each step before making
any move. With a sharp eye for what can possibly go
wrong, he tries to cover all contingencies. At the other end
is the fast mover, who weaves and dodges without a plan.
Inspired by an idea, the fast mover is always ready for
Another aspect of a person's working style is control -
the energy and attention devoted to ensuring that things
happen in a certain way. At one extreme is the tight
controller, a strict administrator with frequent checkpoints.
Rules and policies are to be followed with religious fervour.
At the opposite end are those who move with freedom and
flexibility. They have little patience for bureaucracy. They
delegate easily and give their subordinates wide latitude
for movement. I wanted leaders who tread the middle path,
those who could control without stifling dissent or being
I wanted men who had the capability to grow with
possibilities, with the patience to explore all possible
alternatives, with the wisdom to apply old principles to new
situations; people with the skill to negotiate their way
forward. I wanted them to be accommodating, to be willing
to share their power with others and work in teams,
delegating good jobs, assimilating fresh opinions,
respecting intelligent people, and listening to wise counsel.
They would have to be able to sort out things amicably, and
take responsibility for slip-ups. Above all, they should be
able to take failure in their stride and share in both success
My search for someone to lead the Prithvi project ended
with Col VJ Sundaram who belonged to the EME Corps of
the Indian Army. With a post-graduate degree in
Aeronautical Engineering and expertise in mechanical
vibrations, Sundaram was head of the Structures Group at
DRDL. I found in him a readiness to experiment with new
ways of resolving conflicting points of view. He was an
experimenter and innovator in team work. He had an
extraordinary capability for evaluating alternative ways of
operating. He would suggest moving forward into new
terrains that could lead to a solution which had not been
perceived earlier. Though a particular goal might be clear
to a project leader, and he may be capable of giving
adequate directions for accomplishing it, there can be
resistance from subordinates if the goal makes no sense to
them. Therein lies the importance of a leader who provides
effective work directions. I thought the Project Director of
Prithvi would be the first to make decisions with production
agencies and the armed forces, and Sundaram would be
the ideal choice to see that sound decisions were taken.
For Trishul, I was looking for a man who not only had a
sound knowledge of electronics and missile warfare, but
who could also communicate the complexities to his team
in order to promote understanding and to earn his team's
support. I found in Cmde SR Mohan, who sailed into
Defence R&D from the Indian Navy, a talent for detail and
an almost magical power of persuasion.
For Agni, my dream project, I needed somebody who
would tolerate my occasional meddling in the running of this
project. In RN Agarwal I found the right person. He was an
alumnus of MIT with a brilliant academic record and had
been managing the Aeronautical Test Facilities at DRDL
with keen professional acumen.
Due to technological complexities, Akash and Nag
were then considered missiles of the future; their activities
were expected to peak about half a decade later.
Therefore, I selected the relatively young Prahlada and NR
Iyer for Akash and Nag. Two other young men, VK
Saraswat and AK Kapoor were made deputies to
Sundaram and Mohan respectively.
In those days, there was no forum in DRDL where
issues of general importance could be openly discussed
and decisions debated. Scientists, it must be remembered,
are basically emotional people. Once they stumble, it is
difficult for them to pull themselves together. Setbacks and
disappointments have always been and always will be an
inherent part of any career, even one in science. However, I
did not want any of my scientists to face disappointments
alone. I also wanted to ensure that none of them set their
goals when they were at a low ebb. To avoid such
eventualities a Science Council was created - a sort of
panchayat where the community would sit together and
take common decisions. Every three months, all scientists
- juniors and seniors, veterans and freshers - would sit
together and let off steam.
The very first meeting of the Council was eventful. After
a spell of half-hearted enquiries and expressions of doubt,
one senior scientist, MN Rao, shot a straight question: "On
what basis did you select these five Pandavas (he meant
the Project Directors)?" I was, in fact, expecting this
question. I wanted to tell him that I found all these five
Pandavas married to the Draupadi of positive thinking.
Instead, I told Rao to wait and see. I had chosen them to
take charge of a long-term programme where new storms
Every tomorrow, I told Rao, will give opportunities to
these enthusiastic people - the Agarwals, Prahladas, Iyers,
and Saras-wats - to gain a fresh perspective on their
goals and a strong hold on their commitments.
What makes a productive leader? In my opinion, a
productive leader must be very competent in staffing. He
should continually introduce new blood into the
organization. He must be adept at dealing with problems
and new concepts. The problems encountered by an R&D
organization typically involve trade-offs among a wide
variety of known and unknown parameters. Skill in handling
these complex entities is important in achieving high
productivity. The leader must be capable of instilling
enthusiasm in his team. He should give appropriate credit
where it is due; praise publicly, but criticize privately.
One of the most difficult questions came from a young
scientist: "How are you going to stop these projects from
going the Devil way?" I explained to him the philosophy
behind IGMDP - it begins with design and ends in
deployment. The participation of the production centres and
user agencies right from the design stage had been
ensured and there was no question of going back till the
missile systems had been successfully deployed in the
While the process of forming teams and organizing
work was going on, I found that the space available at
DRDL was grossly inadequate to meet the enhanced
requirements of IGMDP. Some of the facilities would have
to be located at a nearby site. The missile integration and
checkout facility built during the Devil phase consisted only
of a 120 sq. metre shed thickly populated with pigeons.
Where was the space and the facility to integrate the five
missiles which would arrive here shortly? The
Environmental Test Facility and the Avionics Laboratory
were equally cramped and ill-equipped. I visited the nearby
Imarat Kancha area. It used to be the test range for anti-
tank missiles developed by DRDL decades ago. The
terrain was barren - there were hardly any trees - and
dotted with large boulders typical of the Deccan plateau. I
felt as if there was some tremendous energy trapped in
these stones. I decided to locate the integration and check-
out facilities needed for the missile projects here. For the
next three years, this became my mission.
We drew up a proposal to establish a model high
technology research centre with very advanced technical
facilities like an inertial instrumentation laboratory, full-scale
environmental and electronic warfare (EMI/EMC) test
facilities, a composites production centre, high enthalpy
facility, and a state-of-the-art missile integration and
checkout centre. By any standards, this was a gigantic
task. An altogether different brand of expertise, grit and
determination were required to realise this project. Goals
and objectives had already been decided upon. Now they
had to be shared with a large number of people from
various agencies, through the problem-solving and
communication processes that the leader of the team must
build and maintain. Who would be the most suitable person
to do so? I saw almost all the required leadership qualities
in MV Suryakantha Rao. Then, as a large number of
agencies would participate in the creation of Research
Centre Imarat (RCI), someone had to protect hierarchical
sensitivities. I selected Krishna Mohan, who was in his
midthirties, to complement Suryakantha Rao, who was in
his late fifties at that time. Krishna Mohan would encourage
involvement rather than relying on obedience and
monitoring people at their workplaces.
According to the established procedure, we
approached the Military Engineering Services (MES) for
the RCI construction work. They said it would take five
years to complete the task. The matter was discussed in
depth at the highest level in the Ministry of Defence and a
landmark decision to entrust the responsibility of building
defence structures to an outside construction company was
taken. We liaised with the Survey of India and the National
Remote Sensing Agency for the inspection of the contour
maps and for obtaining aerial photographs of the Imarat
Kancha to prepare a layout for the approach roads and the
location of the facilities. The Central Ground Water Board
identified twenty locations amid the rocks to tap water.
Infrastructure to provide 40 MVA power and 5 million litres
of water per day was planned.
It was also at this time that Col SK Salwan, a
mechanical engineer with boundless energy, joined us. In
the final phase of construction, Salwan discovered an
ancient place of worship among the boulders. It seemed to
me that this place was blessed.
Now that we had started working on the design of the
missile systems and development had already commenced
for their integration and checkout, the next logical step was
to look for a suitable site for the missile flight trials. With
SHAR also in Andhra Pradesh, the search for a suitable
site spread towards the eastern coastline and finally ended
at Balasore in Orissa. A site along the north-eastern coast
was identified for a National Test Range. Unfortunately the
entire project ran into rough weather because of the
political issues raised around the evacuation of people
living in that area. We decided therefore to create an
interim infrastructure adjacent to the Proof Experimental
Establishment (PXE) at Chandipur in Balasore district of
Orissa. A funding of Rs 30 crores had been given to
construct the range, called the Interim Test Range (ITR). Dr
HS Rama Rao and his team did an excellent job of working
out innovative and cost-effective specifications for electro-
optical tracking instruments, a tracking telescope system
and an instrumentation tracking radar. Lt Gen RS Deswal
and Maj Gen KN Singh took charge of creating the launch
pad and range infrastructure. There was a beautiful bird
sanctuary in Chandipur. I asked the engineers to design the
test range without disturbing it.
Creating the RCI was perhaps the most satisfying
experience of my life. Developing this centre of excellence
of missile technology was akin to the joy of a potter shaping
artifacts of lasting beauty from the mundane clay.
Defence Minister R Venkataraman visited DRDL in
September 1983 to appraise himself of the activities of
IGMDP. He advised us to list all the resources we needed
to achieve our goals, overlooking nothing, and then include
in the list our own positive imagination and faith. "What you
imagine, is what will transpire. What you believe is what you
will achieve," he said. Both Dr Arunachalam and I saw in
the horizon endless possibilities stretching out before
IGMDP; and our enthusiasm proved infectious. We were
excited and encouraged to see the best professionals in
the country gravitating towards IGMDP. Who would not
want to associate with a winner? The word had evidently
got around that the IGMDP was a born winner.

We were at a meeting laying down the targets for 1984,
when news came of Dr Brahm Prakash's death on the
evening of 3 January at Bombay. It was a great emotional
loss for me, for I had had the privilege of working under him
during the most challenging period of my career. His
compassion and humility were exemplary. His healing
touch on the day of the failed SLV-E1 flight surfaced in my
memory serving to deepen my sorrow.
If Prof. Sarabhai was the creator of VSSC, Dr Brahm
Prakash was the executor. He had nurtured the institution
when it most needed nourishment. Dr Brahm Prakash
played a very important role in shaping my leadership skills.
In fact my association with him was a turning point in my
life. His humility mellowed me and helped me discard my
aggressive approach. His humility did not consist merely in
being modest about his talents or virtues, but in respecting
the dignity of all those who worked under him and in
recognizing the fact that no one is infallible, not even the
leader. He was an intellectual giant with a frail constitution;
he had a childlike innocence and I always considered him a
During this period of renaissance at DRDL, an altitude
control system and an on-board computer developed by P
Banerjee, KV Ramana Sai and their team was almost
ready. The success of this effort was very vital for any
indigenous missile development programme. All the same,
we had to have a missile to test this important system.
After many brainstorming sessions, we decided to
improvise a Devil missile to test the system. A Devil missile
was dis-assembled, many modifications made, extensive
subsystem testing was done and the missile checkout
system was reconfigured. After installing a make-shift
launcher, the modified and extended range Devil missile
was fired on 26 June 1984 to flight test the first indigenous
Strap-down Inertial Guidance system. The system met all
the requirements. This was the first and very significant
step in the history of Indian missile development, which had
so far been restricted to reverse engineering, towards
designing our own systems. A long-denied opportunity was
at last utilized by missile scientists at DRDL. The message
was loud and clear. We could do it!
It did not take long for the message to reach Delhi.
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi expressed her desire to
personally apprise herself of the progress of the IGMDP.
The entire organization was filled with an aura of
excitement. On 19 July 1984, Shrimati Gandhi visited
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was a person with a
tremendous sense of pride - in herself, in her work and in
her country. I deemed it an honour to receive her at DRDL
as she had instilled some of her own pride into my
otherwise modest frame of mind. She was immensely
conscious that she was the leader of eight hundred million
people. Every step, every gesture, every movement of her
hands was optimised. The esteem in which she held our
work in the field of guided missiles boosted our morale
During the one hour that she spent at DRDL, she
covered wideranging aspects of the IGMDP, from flight
system plans to multiple development laboratories. In the
end, she addressed the 2000-strong DRDL community.
She asked for the schedules of the flight system that we
were working on. "When are you going to flight test Prithvi?"
Shrimati Gandhi asked. I said, "June 1987." She
immediately responded, "Let me know what is needed to
accelerate the flight schedule." She wanted scientific and
technological results fast. "Your fast pace of work is the
hope of the entire nation," she said. She also told me that
the emphasis of the IGMDP should be not only on schedule
but also on the pursuance of excellence. "No matter what
you achieve, you should never be completely satisfied and
should always be searching for ways to prove yourself," she
added. Within a month, she demonstrated her interest and
support by sending the newly appointed Defence Minister,
SB Chavan, to review our projects. Shrimati Gandhi's
follow-up approach was not only impressive, it was
effective too. Today, everyone associated with aerospace
research in our country knows that excellence is
synonymous with the IGMDP.
We had our home-grown, but effective, management
techniques. One such technique was concerned with follow-
up of project activities. It basically consisted of analysing
the technical as well as procedural applicability of a
possible solution, testing it with the work centres,
discussing it with the general body of associates and
implementing it after enlisting everybody's support. A large
number of original ideas sprung up from the grass root level
of participating work centres. If you were to ask me to
indicate the single most important managerial tactic in this
successful programme, I would point to the pro-active
follow-up. Through follow-up on the work done at different
laboratories on design, planning, supporting services, and
by the inspection agencies and academic institutions, rapid
progress has been achieved in the most harmonious
manner. In fact, the work code in the Guided Missile
Programme Office was: if you need to write a letter to a
work centre, send a fax; if you need to send a telex or fax,
telephone; and if the need arises for telephonic
discussions, visit the place personally.
The power of this approach came to light when Dr
Arunachalam conducted a comprehensive status review of
IGMDP on 27 September 1984. Experts from DRDO
Laboratories, ISRO, academic institutions, and production
agencies gathered to critically review the progress made
and problems faced in the first year of implementation.
Major decisions like the creation of facilities at Imarat
Kancha and the establishment of a test facility were
crystallized during the review. The future infrastructure at the
Imarat Kancha was given the name of Research Centre
Imarat (RCI), retaining the original identity of the place.
It was a pleasure to find an old acquaintance, TN
Seshan, on the review board. Between SLV-3 and now, we
had developed a mutual affection. However, this time as
the Defence Secretary, Seshan's queries about the
schedules and viability of financial propositions presented
were much more pointed. Seshan is a person who enjoys
verbally bringing adversaries to their knees. Using his
sharp-edged humour, Seshan would make his opponents
look ridiculous. Although he is prone to be loud and can turn
argumentative on occasions, in the end he would always
ensure maximization of all available resources towards a
solution that was within implementation. At a personal level,
Seshan is a very kind-hearted and considerate person. My
team was particularly pleased to answer his questions
about the advanced technology employed in the IGMDP. I
still remember his uncanny curiosity about the indigenous
development of carbon-carbon composites. And to let you
into a small secret - Seshan is perhaps the only person in
the world who enjoys calling me by my full name which
contains 31 letters and five words - Avul Pakir
The missile programme had been pursued concurrently
and had partners in design, development and production
from 12 academic institutions and 30 laboratories from
DRDO, the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
(CSIR), ISRO and industry. In fact, more than 50 professors
and 100 research scholars worked on missile-related
problems in the laboratories of their respective institutes.
The quality of work achieved through this partnership in that
one year had given me tremendous confidence that any
development task could be undertaken within the country so
long as we have our focussed schedules. Four months
before this review, I think it was during April-June 1984, six
of us in the missile programme visited academic
campuses and enlisted promising young graduates. We
presented an outline of the missile programme before the
professors and the aspiring students, about 350 of them,
and requested them to participate. I informed the reviewers
that we were expecting around 300 young engineers to join
Roddam Narasimha, then Director of the National
Aeronautical Laboratory, used the occasion of this review
to put up a strong case for technology initiative. He cited
the experiences of the green revolution, which had
demonstrated beyond doubt that if the goals were clear,
there was enough talent available in the country to tackle
When India carried out its first nuclear explosion for
peaceful purposes, we declared ourselves the sixth country
in the world to explode a nuclear device. When we
launched SLV-3 we were the fifth country to achieve
satellite launch capability. When were we going to be the
first or second country in the world to achieve a
I listened carefully to the review members as they aired
their opinions and doubts, and I learned from their collective
wisdom. It was indeed a great education for me. Ironically,
all through school, we were taught to read, write and speak,
but never to listen, and the situation remains much the
same today. Traditionally, Indian scientists have been very
good speakers, but have inadequately developed listening
skills. We made a resolution to be attentive listeners. Are
engineering structures not built on the foundation of
functional utility? Does technical know-how not form its
bricks? And, are these bricks not put together with the
mortar of constructive criticism? The foundation had been
laid, the bricks baked, and now the mortar to cement our
act together was being mixed.
We were working on the action plan that had emerged
from the earlier month's review, when the news of Shrimati
Gandhi's assassination broke. This was followed by the
news of widespread violence and riots. A curfew had been
imposed in Hyderabad city. We rolled up the PERT charts
and a city map was spread out over the table to organize
transport and safe passage for all employees. In less than
an hour, the laboratory wore a deserted look. I was left
sitting alone in my office. The circumstances of Shrimati
Gandhi's death were very ominous. The memories of her
visit barely three months ago further deepened my pain.
Why should great people meet with such horrific ends? I
recollected my father telling someone in a similar context:
"Good and bad people live together under the sun as the
black thread and the white are woven together in a cloth.
When either one of the black or white thread breaks, the
weaver shall look into the whole cloth, and he shall examine
the loom also." When I drove out of the laboratory there was
not a single soul on the road. I kept thinking about the loom
of the broken thread.
Shrimati Gandhi's death was a tremendous loss to the
scientific community. She had given impetus to scientific
research in the country. But India is a very resilient nation. It
gradually absorbed the shock of Shrimati Gandhi's
assassination, although at the cost of thousands of lives
and a colossal loss of property. Her son, Rajiv Gandhi, took
over as the new Prime Minister of India. He went to the
polls and obtained a mandate from the people to carry
forward the policies of Mrs. Gandhi, the Integrated Guided
Missile Development Programme being a part of them.
By the summer of 1985, all the groundwork had been
completed for building the Missile Technology Research
Centre at Imarat Kancha. Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi laid
the foundation stone of the Research Centre Imarat (RCI)
on 3 August 1985. He appeared very pleased with the
progress made. There was a child-like curiosity in him
which was very engaging. The grit and determination
displayed by his mother when she visited us a year ago
was also present in him, although with a small difference.
Madam Gandhi was a taskmaster, whereas Prime Minister
Rajiv Gandhi used his charisma to achieve his ends. He
told the DRDL family that he realised the hardships faced
by Indian scientists and expressed his gratitude towards
those who preferred to stay back and work in their
motherland rather than go abroad for comfortable careers.
He said that nobody could concentrate on work of this type
unless he was free from the trivialities of daily life, and
assured us that whatever necessary would be done to
make scientists' lives more comfortable.
Within a week of his visit, I left for the USA with Dr
Arunachalam on an invitation from the United States Air
Force. Roddam Narasimha of National Aeronautical
Laboratory and KK Ganapathy of HAL accompanied us.
After finishing our work at the Pentagon in Washington, we
landed in San Francisco on our way to Los Angeles to visit
Northrop Corporation. I utilized this opportunity to visit the
Crystal Cathedral built by my favourite author, Robert
Schuller. I was amazed by the sheer beauty of this all-glass,
four-pointed, star-shaped structure that is more than 400
feet from one point to another. The glass roof which is 100
feet longer than a football field seemed to float in space.
This Cathedral has been built at the cost of several million
dollars through donations organized by Schuller. "God can
do tremendous things through the person who doesn't care
about who gets the credit. The ego involvement must go,"
writes Schuller. "Before God trusts you with success, you
have to prove yourself humble enough to handle the big
prize." I prayed to God in Schuller's church to help me build
a Research Centre at the Imarat Kancha - that would be my

The young engineers, 280 to be precise, changed the
dynamics of DRDL. It was a valuable experience for all of
us. We were now in a position to develop, through these
young teams, a re-entry technology and structure, a
millimetric wave radar, a phased array radar, rocket
systems and other such equipment. When we first assigned
these tasks to the young scientists, they did not fully grasp
the importance of their work. Once they did, they felt uneasy
under the burden of the tremendous faith placed in them. I
still remember one young man telling me, "There is no big
shot in our team, how will we be able to break through?" I
told him, "A big shot is a little shot who keeps on shooting,
so keep trying." It was astonishing to see how in the young
scientific environment, negative attitudes changed to
positive and things that were previously thought impractical
began happening. Many older scientists were rejuvenated
simply by being part of a young team.
It has been my personal experience that the true flavour,
the real fun, the continuous excitement of work lie in the
process of doing it rather than in having it over and done
with. To return to the four basic factors that I am convinced
are involved in successful outcomes: goal-setting, positive
thinking, visualizing, and believing.
By now, we had gone through an elaborate exercise of
goal-setting and enthused the young scientists about these
goals. At the review meetings, I would insist that the
youngest scientists present their team's work. That would
help them in visualizing the whole system. Gradually, an
atmosphere of confidence grew. Young scientists started
questioning senior colleagues on solid technical issues.
Nothing daunted them, because they feared nothing. If there
were doubts, they rose above them. They soon became
persons of power. A person with belief never grovels
before anyone, whining and whimpering that it's all too
much, that he lacks support, that he is being treated
unfairly. Instead, such a person tackles problems head on
and then affirms, 'As a child of God, I am greater than
anything that can happen to me'. I tried to keep the work
environment lively with a good blend of the experience of
the older scientists mixed with the skills of their younger
colleagues. This positive dependence between youth and
experience had created a very productive work culture at
The first launch of the Missile Programme was
conducted on 16 September 1985, when Trishul took off
from the test range at Sriharikota (SHAR). It was a ballistic
flight meant for testing the inflight performance of the solid
propellant rocket motor. Two C-Band radars and Kalidieo-
theodolite (KTLs) were used to track the missile from the
ground. The test was successful. The launcher, rocket
motor and telemetry systems functioned as planned. The
aerodynamic drag however was higher than the estimates
predicted on the basis of wind tunnel testing. In terms of
technology breakthrough or experience enrichment, this
test was of little value but the real achievement of this test
was to remind my DRDL friends that they could fly missiles
without being driven by the brute demands of compliance
or reverse engineering. In a swift stroke, the psyche of the
DRDL scientists experienced a multi-dimensional
This was followed by the successful test flight of the
Pilotless Target Aircraft (PTA). Our engineers had
developed the rocket motor for the PTA designed by the
Establishment (ADE). The motor had been type- approved
by DTD&P (Air). This was a small but significant step
towards developing missile hardware that is not only
functional but also acceptable to the user agencies. A
private sector firm was engaged to produce a reliable,
airworthy, high thrust-to-weight ratio rocket motor with
technology input from DRDL. We were slowly graduating
from single laboratory projects to multi-laboratory
programmes to laboratory-industry exercises. The
development of PTA symbolized a great confluence of four
different organizations. I felt as if I was standing at a
meeting point and looking at the roads coming from ADE,
DTD&P (Air) and ISRO. The fourth road was the DRDL, a
highway to national self-reliance in missile technology.
Taking our partnership with the academic institutions of
the country a step further, Joint Advanced Technology
Programmes were started at the Indian Institute of Science
(IISc), and Jadavpur University. I have always had a deep
regard for academic institutions and reverence for excellent
academicians. I value the inputs that academicians can
make to development. Formal requests had been placed
with these institutions and arrangements arrived at under
which expertise from their faculties would be extended to
DRDL in pursuance of its projects.
Let me highlight a few contributions of academic
institutions to the various missile systems. Prithvi had been
designed as an inertially guided missile. To reach the
target accurately, the trajectory parameters have to be
loaded into its brain - an on-board computer. A team of
young engineering graduates at Jadavpur University under
the guidance of Prof. Ghoshal developed the required
robust guidance algorithm. At the IISc, postgraduate
students under the leadership of Prof. IG Sharma
developed air defence software for multi-target acquisition
by Akash. The re- entry vehicle system design methodology
for Agni was developed by a young team at IIT Madras and
DRDO scientists. Osmania University's Navigational
Electronics Research and Training Unit had developed
stateof-the-art signal processing algorithms for Nag. I have
only given a few examples of collaborative endeavour. In
fact, it would have been very difficult to achieve our
advanced technological goals without the active
partnership of our academic institutions.
Let us consider the example of the Agni payload
breakthrough. Agni is a two-stage rocket system and
employs re-entry technology developed in the country for
the first time. It is boosted by a first-stage solid rocket
motor derived from SLV-3 and further accelerated at the
second stage with the liquid rocket engines of Prithvi. For
the Agni, the payload gets delivered at hypersonic speeds,
which calls for the design and development of a re-entry
vehicle structure. The payload with guidance electronics is
housed in the re-entry vehicle structure, which is meant to
protect the payload by keeping the inside temperature
within the limit of 40oC, when the outside skin temperature
is greater than 2500oC. An inertial guidance system with
an on-board computer guides the payload to the required
target. For any re-entry missile system, three-dimensional
preforms are core material for making the carbon-carbon
nose tip that will remain strong even at such high
temperatures. Four laboratories of DRDO and the CSIR
achieved this in a short span of 18 months - something
other countries could do only after a decade of research
Another challenge involved in the Agni payload design
was related to the tremendous speed with which it would
re-enter the atmosphere. In fact, Agni would re-enter the
atmosphere at twelve times the speed of sound (12 Mach,
as we call it in science). At this tremendous speed, we had
no experience of how to keep the vehicle under control. To
carry out a test, we had no wind tunnel to generate that kind
of speed. If we sought American help, we would have been
seen as aspiring to something they considered their
exclusive privilege. Even if they consented to co-operate,
they would be certain to quote a price for their wind tunnel
greater than our entire project budget. Now, the question
was how to beat the system. Prof. SM Deshpande of the
IISc found four young, bright scientists working in the field of
fluid dynamics and, within six months, developed the
software for Computational Fluid Dynamics for Hypersonic
Regimes, which is one of its kind in the world.
Another achievement was the development of a missile
trajectory simulation software, ANUKALPANA by Prof. IG
Sharma of IISc to evaluate multi-target acquisition
capabilities of an Akash-type weapon system. No country
would have given us this kind of software, but we
In yet another example of creating a synergy of scientific
talent, Prof. Bharati Bhatt of IIT Delhi, working with the Solid
Physics Laboratory (SPL) and Central Electronics Limited
(CEL), broke the monopoly of the western countries by
developing ferrite phase shifters for use in the multi-
function, multi-tasking 3-D Phased Army Radar for
surveillence, tracking and guidance of Akash. Prof. Saraf of
IIT, Kharagpur, working with BK Mukho-padhyay, my
colleague at RCI, made a millimetric wave (MMW) antenna
for the Nag Seeker Head in two years, a record even by
international standards. The Central Electrical and
Electronics Research Institute (CEERI), Pilani developed
an Impatt Diode in consortium with the SPL and RCI to
overcome technological foreign dependence in creating
these components, which are the heart of any MMW
As work on the project spread horizontally, performance
appraisal became more and more difficult. DRDO has an
assessment-linked policy. Leading nearly 500 scientists, I
had to finalize their performance appraisals in the form of
Annual Confidential Reports (ACRs). These reports would
be forwarded to an assessment board comprised of
outside specialists for recommendations. Many people
viewed this part of my job uncharitably. Missing a
promotion was conveniently translated as a dislike I had
towards them. Promotions of other colleagues were seen
as subjective favours granted by me. Entrusted with the
task of performance evaluation, I had to be a fair judge.
To truly understand a judge, you must understand the
riddle of the scales; one side heaped high with hope, the
other side holding apprehension. When the scales dip,
bright optimism turns into silent panic.
When a person looks at himself, he is likely to misjudge
what he finds. He sees only his intentions. Most people
have good intentions and hence conclude that whatever
they are doing is good. It is difficult for an individual to
objectively judge his actions, which may be, and often are,
contradictory to his good intentions. Most people come to
work with the intention of doing it. Many of them do their
work in a manner they find convenient and leave for home
in the evening with a sense of satisfaction. They do not
evaluate their performance, only their intentions. It is
assumed that because an individual has worked with the
intention of finishing his work in time, if delays occurred,
they were due to reasons beyond his control. He had no
intention of causing the delay. But if his action or inaction
caused that delay, was it not intentional?
Looking back on my days as a young scientist, I am
aware that one of the most constant and powerful urges I
experienced was my desire to be more than what I was at
that moment. I desired to feel more, learn more, express
more. I desired to grow, improve, purify, expand. I never
used any outside influence to advance my career. All I had
was the inner urge to seek more within myself. The key to
my motivation has always been to look at how far I had still
to go rather than how far I had come. After all, what is life
but a mixture of unsolved problems, ambiguous victories,
The trouble is that we often merely analyse life instead
of dealing with it. People dissect their failures for causes
and effects, but seldom deal with them and gain experience
to master them and thereby avoid their recurrence. This is
my belief: that through difficulties and problems God gives
us the opportunity to grow. So when your hopes and
dreams and goals are dashed, search among the
wreckage, you may find a golden opportunity hidden in the
To motivate people to enhance their performance and
deal with depression is always a challenge for a leader. I
have observed an analogy between a force field
equilibrium and resistance to change in organizations. Let
us imagine change to be a coiled spring in a field of
opposing forces, such that some forces support change
and others resist it. By increasing the supportive forces
such as supervisory pressure, prospects of career growth
and monetary benefits or decreasing the resisting forces
such as group norms, social rewards, and work avoidance,
the situation can be directed towards the desired result -
but for a short time only, and that too only to a certain
extent. After a while the resisting forces push back with
greater force as they are compressed even more tightly.
Therefore, a better approach would be to decrease the
resisting force in such a manner that there is no
concomittant increase in the supporting forces. In this way,
less energy will be needed to bring about and maintain
The result of the forces I mentioned above, is motive. It
is a force which is internal to the individual and forms the
basis of his behaviour in the work environment. In my
experience, most people possess a strong inner drive for
growth, competence, and self- actualization. The problem,
however, has been the lack of a work environment that
stimulates and permits them to give full expression to this
drive. Leaders can create a high productivity level by
providing the appropriate organizational structure and job
design, and by acknowledging and appreciating hard work.
I first attempted to build up such a supportive
environment in 1983, while launching IGMDP. The projects
were in the design phase at that time. The re-organization
resulted in at least forty per cent to fifty per cent increase in
the level of activity. Now that the multiple projects were
entering into the development and flight-testing stage, the
major and minor milestones reached gave the programme
visibility and continuous commitment. With the absorption
of a young team of scientists, the average age had been
brought down from 42 to 33 years. I felt it was time for a
second re-organization. But how should I go about it? I took
stock of the motivational inventory available at that time -
let me explain to you what I mean by this term. The
motivational inventory of a leader is made up of three types
of understanding: an understanding of the needs that
people expect to satisfy in their jobs, an understanding of
the effect that job design has on motivation, and an
understanding of the power of positive reinforcement in
The 1983 re-organization was done with the objective of
renewal: it was indeed a very complex exercise handled
deftly by AV Ranga Rao and Col R Swaminathan. We
created a team of newly-joined young scientists with just
one experienced person and gave them the challenge of
building the strap-down inertial guidance system, an on-
board computer and a ram rocket in propulsion system.
These exercises were being attempted for the first time in
the country, and the technology involved was comparable
with world-class systems. The guidance technology is
centred around the gyro and accelerometer package, and
electronics, to process the sensor output. The on-board
computer carries the mission computations and flight
sequencing. A ram rocket system breathes air to sustain its
high velocity for long durations after it is put through a
booster rocket. The young teams not only designed these
systems but also developed them into operational
equipment. Later Prithvi and then Agni used similar
guidance systems, with excellent results. The effort of these
young teams made the country self-reliant in the area of
protected technologies. It was a good demonstration of the
'renewal factor'. Our intellectual capacity was renewed
through contact with enthusiastic young minds and had
achieved these outstanding results.
Now, besides the renewal of manpower, emphasis had
to be laid on augmenting the strength of project groups.
Often people seek to satisfy their social, egoistic, and self-
actualization needs at their workplaces. A good leader
must identify two different sets of environmental features.
One, which satisfies a person's needs and the other, which
creates dissatisfaction with his work. We have already
observed that people look for those characteristics in their
work that relate to the values and goals which they consider
important as giving meaning to their lives. If a job meets the
employees'need for achievement, recognition,
responsibility, growth and advancement, they will work hard
Once the work is satisfying, a person then looks at the
environment and circumstances in the workplace. He
observes the policies of the administration, qualities of his
leader, security, status and working conditions. Then, he
correlates these factors to the inter-personal relations he
has with his peers and examines his personal life in the
light of these factors. It is the agglomerate of all these
aspects that decides the degree and quality of a person's
The matrix organization evolved in 1983 proved
excellent in meeting all these requirements. So, while
retaining this structure of the laboratory, we undertook a
task-design exercise. The scientists working in technology
directorates were made system managers to interact
exclusively with one project. An external fabrication wing
was formed under PK Biswas, a developmental fabrication
technologist of long standing, to deal with the public sector
undertakings (PSUs) and private sector firms associated
with the development of the missile hardware. This reduced
pressure on the in-house fabrication facilities and enabled
them to concentrate on jobs which could not be undertaken
outside, which in fact occupied all the three shifts.
Work on Prithvi was nearing completion when we
entered 1988. For the first time in the country, clustered
Liquid Propellant (LP) rocket engines with programmable
total impulse were going to be used in a missile system to
attain flexibility in payload range combination. Now,
besides the scope and quality of the policy decisions
Sundaram and I were providing to the Prithvi team, the
project's success depended on creative ideas being
converted into workable products and the quality and
thoroughness of the team members' contribution. Saraswat
with Y Gyaneshwar and P Venugopalan did a
commendable job in this regard. They instilled in their team
a sense of pride and achievement. The importance of
these rocket engines was not restricted to the Prithvi
project - it was a national achievement. Under their
collective leadership, a large number of engineers and
technicians understood and committed themselves to the
team goals, as well as the specific goals which each one of
them was committed to accomplish personally. Their entire
team worked under a self-evident sort of direction. Working
together with the Ordnance Factory, Kirkee, they also
completely eliminated the import content in the propellant
Leaving the vehicle development in the safe and
efficient hands of Sundaram and Saraswat, I started
looking at the mission's vulnerable areas. Meticulous
planning had gone into the development of the launch
release mechanism (LRM) for the smooth lift-off of the
missile. The joint development of explosive bolts to hold the
LRM prior to the launch by DRDL and Explosive Research
and Development Laboratory (ERDL) was an excellent
example of multi- work centre coordination.
While flying, drifting into spells of contemplation and
looking down at the landscape below has always been my
favourite preoccupation. It is so beautiful, so harmonious,
so peaceful from a distance that I wonder where all those
boundaries are which separate district from district, state
from state, and country from country. Maybe such a sense
of distance and detachment is required in dealing with all
the activities of our life.
Since the Interim Test Range at Balasore was still at
least a year away from completion, we had set up special
facilities at SHAR for the launch of Prithvi. These included a
launch pad, block house, control consoles and mobile
telemetry stations. I had a happy reunion with my old friend
MR Kurup who was the Director, SHAR Centre by then.
Working with Kurup on the Prithvi launch campaign gave
me great satisfaction. Kurup worked for Prithvi as a team
member, ignoring the boundary lines that divide DRDO and
ISRO, DRDL and SHAR. Kurup used to spend a lot of time
with us at the launch pad. He complemented us with his
experience in range testing and range safety and worked
with great enthusiasm in propellant filling, making the
maiden Prithvi launch campaign a memorable experience.
Prithvi was launched at 11:23 hrs on 25 February 1988.
It was an epoch-making event in the history of rocketry in
the country. Prithvi was not merely a surface-to-surface
missile with a capability of delivering a 1000 kg
conventional warhead to a distance of 150 km with an
accuracy of 50 meter CEP; it was in fact the basic module
for all future guided missiles in the country. It already had
the provision for modification from a long-range surface to
an air missile system, and could also be deployed on a
The accuracy of a missile is expressed in terms of its
Circular Error Probable (CEP). This measures the radius of
a circle within which 50 per cent of the missiles fired will
impact. In other words, if a missile has a CEP of 1 km
(such as the Iraqi Scud missiles fired in the Gulf War), this
means that half of them should impact within 1 km of their
target. A missile with a conventional high-explosive
warhead and a CEP of 1 km would not normally be
expected to destroy or disable fixed military targets such as
a Command and Control Facility or an Air Base. It would
however be effective against an undefined target such as a
The German V-2 missiles fired at London between
September 1944 and March 1945 had a conventional high-
explosive warhead and a very large CEP of some 17 km.
Yet the 500 V-2s which hit London succeeded in causing
more than 21,000 casualties and destroying about 200,000
When the West were crying themselves hoarse over the
NPT, we stressed upon building competence in core
guidance and control technologies to achieve a CEP as
precise as 50 m. With the success of the Prithvi trials, the
cold reality of a possible strategic strike even without a
nuclear warhead had silenced the critics to whispers about
a possible technology-conspiracy theory.
The launch of Prithvi sent shock waves across the
unfriendly neighbouring countries. The response of the
Western bloc was initially one of shock and then of anger. A
seven-nation technology embargo was clamped, making it
impossible for India to buy anything even remotely
connected with the development of guided missiles. The
emergence of India as a self-reliant country in the field of
guided missiles upset all the developed nations of the

Indian core competence in rocketry has been firmly
established again, beyond any doubt. The robust civilian
space industry and viable missilebased defences has
brought India into the select club of nations that call
themselves superpowers. Always encouraged to follow
Buddha's or Gandhi's teachings, how and why did India
become a missile power is a question that needs to be
answered for future generations.
Two centuries of subjugation, oppression and denial
have failed to kill the creativity and capability of the Indian
people. Within just a decade of gaining independence and
achieving sovereignty, Indian Space and Atomic Energy
Programmes were launched with a perfect orientation
towards peaceful applications. There were neither funds for
investing in missile development nor any established
requirement from the Armed Forces. The bitter
experiences of 1962 forced us to take the basic first steps
Would a Prithvi suffice? Would the indigenous
development of four or five missile systems make us
sufficiently strong? Or would having nuclear weapons make
us stronger? Missiles and atomic weapons are merely
parts of a greater whole. As I saw it, the development of
Prithvi represented the self-reliance of our country in the
field of advanced technology. High technology is
synonymous with huge amounts of money and massive
infrastructure. Neither of these was available, unfortunately,
in adequate measure. So what could we do? Perhaps the
Agni missile being developed as a technology
demonstrator project, pooling all the resources available in
the country, could provide an answer?
I was very sure, even when we discussed REX in ISRO
about a decade ago, that Indian scientists and
technologists working together had the capability to
achieve this technological breakthrough. India can most
certainly achieve state-of-the-art technology through a
combined effort of the scientific laboratories and the
academic institutions. If one can liberate Indian industry
from the self-created image of being mere fabricating
factories, they can implement indigenously developed
technology and attain excellent results. To do this, we
adopted a threefold strategy - multi-institutional
participation, the consortium approach, and the
empowering technology. These were the stones rubbed
together to create Agni.
The Agni team was comprised of more than 500
scientists. Many organizations were networked to
undertake this huge effort of launching Agni. The Agni
mission had two basic orientations - work and workers.
Each member was dependent on the others in his team to
accomplish his target. Contradiction and confusion are the
two things most likely to occur in such situations. Different
leaders accommodate concern for workers while getting
work done, in their own personal ways. Some shed all
concern for workers in order to get results. They use people
merely as instruments to reach goals. Some give less
importance to the work, and make an effort to gain the
warmth and approval of people working with them. But what
this team achieved was the highest possible integration in
terms of both the quality of work and human relationships.
Involvement, participation and commitment were the key
words to functioning. Each of the team members appeared
to be performing by choice. The launching of Agni was the
common stake not only for our scientists, but for their
families too. VR Nagaraj was the leader of the electrical
integration team. Dedicated technologist that he is,
Nagaraj would forget basic requirements like food and
sleep while on the integration gig. His brother-in-law
passed away while he was at ITR. His family kept this
information from Nagaraj so that there would be no
interruption in his work towards the launching of Agni.
The Agni launch had been scheduled for 20 April 1989.
This was going to be an unprecedented exercise. Unlike
space launch vehicles, a missile launch involves wide-
ranging safety hazards. Two radars, three telemetry
stations, one telecommand station and four electro-optical
tracking instruments to monitor the missile trajectory had
been deployed. In addition, the telemetry station at Car
Nicobar (ISTRAC) and the SHAR radars were also
commissioned to track the vehicle. Dynamic surveillance
was employed to cover the electrical power that flows from
the missile batteries within the vehicle and to control
system pressures. Should any deviation be noticed either
in voltage or in pressure, the specially designed automatic
checkout system would signal "Hold". The flight operations
would then be sequenced only if the defect was rectified.
The countdown for the launch started at T-36 hours. The
countdown from T-7.5 minutes was to be computer
All activities preparatory to the launch went according to
schedule. We had decided to move the people living in
nearby villages to safety at the time of the launch. This
attracted media attention, and led to much controversy. By
the time 20 April 1989 arrived, the whole nation was
watching us. Foreign pressure was exerted through
diplomatic channels to abort the flight trial, but the Indian
Government stood behind us like a rock and staved off any
distraction to our work. We were at T-14 seconds when the
computer signalled "Hold", indicating that one of the
instruments was functioning erratically. This was
immediately rectified. Meanwhile, the down-range station
asked for a "Hold". In another few seconds, multiple Holds
were necessitated, resulting in irreversible internal power
consumption. We had to abort the launch. The missile had
to be opened up to replace the on-board power supplies. A
weeping Nagaraj, by now informed about the tragedy in his
family, met me and promised that he would be back within
three days. The profiles of these courageous people will
never be written about in any history book, but it is such
silent people on whose hard work generations thrive and
nations progress. Sending Nagaraj off, I met my team
members who were in a state of shock and sorrow. I
shared my SLV-3 experience with them. "I lost my launch
vehicle in the sea but recovered successfully. Your missile
is in front of you. In fact you have lost nothing but a few
weeks of rework." This shook them out of their immobility
and the entire team went back to retrieve the subsystems
The press was up in arms, and fielded various
interpretations of the postponement of the flight to suit the
fancies of their readership. Cartoonist Sudhir Dar sketched
a shopkeeper returning a product to the salesman saying
that like Agni it would not take off. Another cartoonist
showed one Agni scientist explaining that the launch was
postponed because the press button did not make contact.
The Hindustan Times showed a leader consoling press
reporters, "There's no need for any alarm ... it's a purely
After a detailed analysis conducted virtually around the
clock for the next ten days, our scientists had the missile
ready for launch on 1 May 1989. But, again, during the
automatic computer checkout period at T10 seconds, a
Hold signal was indicated. A closer inspection showed that
one of the control components, S1-TVC was not working
according to the mission requirements. The launch had to
be postponed yet again. Now, such things are very
common in rocketry and quite often happen in other
countries too. But the expectant nation was in no mood to
appreciate our difficulties. The Hindu carried a cartoon by
Keshav showing a villager counting some currency notes
and commenting to another, "Yes, it's the compensation for
moving away from my hut near the test site - a few more
postponements and I can build a house of my own...".
Another cartoonist designated Agni as " IDBM -
Intermittently Delayed Ballistic Missile." Amul's cartoon
suggested that what Agni needed to do was use their butter
I took some time off, leaving my team at ITR to talk to
the DRDLRCI community. The entire DRDL-RCI community
assembled after working hours on 8 May 1989. I
addressed the gathering of more than 2,000 persons, "Very
rarely is a laboratory or an R&D establishment given an
opportunity to be the first in the country to develop a system
such as Agni. A great opportunity has been given to us.
Naturally major opportunities are accompanied by equally
major challenges. We should not give up and we should not
allow the problem to defeat us. The country doesn't deserve
anything less than success from us. Let us aim for
success". I had almost completed my address, when I found
myself telling my people, "I promise you, we will be back
after successfully launching Agni before the end of this
Detailed analysis of the component failure during the
second attempt led to the refurbishment of the control
system. This task was entrusted to a DRDO-ISRO team.
The team carried out the rectification of the first stage
control system at the Liquid Propellant System Complex
(LPSC) of ISRO and completed the task in record time with
tremendous concentration and will-power. It was nothing
short of amazing how hundreds of scientists and staff
worked continuously and completed the system readiness
with acceptance tests in just 10 days. The aircraft took off
from Trivandrum with the rectified control systems and
landed close to ITR on the eleventh day. But now it was the
turn of hostile weather conditions to impede us. A cyclone
threat was looming large. All the work centres were
connected through satellite communication and HF links.
Meteorological data started flowing in at ten-minute
Finally, the launch was scheduled for 22 May 1989. The
previous night, Dr Arunachalam, Gen KN Singh and I were
walking together with the Defence Minister KC Pant, who
had come to ITR to witness the launch. It was a full-moon
night, it was high tide and the waves crashed and roared,
as if singing of His glory and power. Would we succeed
with the Agni launch tomorrow? This question was foremost
in all our minds, but none of us was willing to break the spell
cast by the beautiful moonlit night. Breaking a long silence,
the Defence Minister finally asked me, "Kalam! what would
you like me to do to celebrate the Agni success tomorrow?"
It was a simple question, to which I could not think of an
answer immediately. What did I want? What was it that I did
not have? What could make me happier? And then I found
the answer. "We need 100,000 saplings to plant at RCI," I
said. His face lit up with a friendly glow. "You are buying the
blessings of Mother Earth for Agni," Defence Minister KC
Pant quipped. "We will succeed tomorrow", he predicted.
The next day Agni took off at 0710 hrs. It was a perfect
launch. The missile followed a textbook trajectory. All flight
parameters were met. It was like waking up to a beautiful
morning from a nightmarish sleep. We had reached the
launch pad after five years of continuous work at multiple
work centres. We had lived through the ordeal of a series of
snags in the last five weeks. We had survived pressure
from everywhere to stop the whole thing. But we did it at
last! It was one of the greatest moments of my life. A mere
600 seconds of elegant flight washed off our entire fatigue
in an instant. What a wonderful culmination of our years of
labour. I wrote in my diary that night:
Do not look at Agni
as an entity directed upward
to deter the ominous
or exhibit your might.
in the heart of an Indian.
Do not even give it
the form of a missile
as it clings to the
burning pride of this nation
and thus is bright.
Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi called the Agni launch "a
major achievement in our continuing efforts to safeguard
our independence and security by self-reliant means. The
technology demonstration through Agni is a reflection of our
commitment to the indigenous development of advanced
technologies for the nation's defence." "The country is
proud of your efforts," he told me. President Venkataraman
saw in the Agni success the fulfilment of his dream. He
cabled from Simla, "It is a tribute to your dedication, hard
A great deal of misinformation and disinformation had
been spread by vested interests about this technology
mission. Agni had never been intended only as a nuclear
weapon system. What it did was to afford us the option of
developing the ability to deliver non-nuclear weapons with
high precision at long ranges. That it provided us with a
viable nonnuclear option was of the greatest relevance to
Great ire was raised by the test firing of Agni, according
to a wellknown American defence journal, especially in the
United States where Congressmen threatened to put a
stop to all dual-use and missile-related technologies, along
with all multinational aid.
Gary Milhollin, a so-called specialist in missiles and
warhead technologies, had made a claim in The Wall
Street Journal that India had made Agni with the help of
West Germany. I had a hearty laugh reading that the
German Aerospace Research Establishment (DLR) had
developed Agni's guidance system, the first-stage rocket,
and a composite nose cone, and that the aerodynamic
model of Agni was tested in the DLR wind tunnel. An
immediate denial came from the DLR, who in turn
speculated that France had supplied the Agni guidance
electronics. American Senator Jeff Bingaman even went to
the extent of suggesting that I picked up everything needed
for Agni during my four-month stay at Wallop's Island in
1962. The fact that I was in Wallop's Island more than 25
years ago and at that time the technology used in Agni did
not exist even in the United States was not mentioned.
In today's world, technological backwardness leads to
subjugation. Can we allow our freedom to be compromised
on this account? It is our bounden duty to guarantee the
security and integrity of our nation against this threat.
Should we not uphold the mandate bequeathed to us by our
forefathers who fought for the liberation of our country from
imperialism? Only when we are technologically self-reliant
will we able to fulfill their dream.
Till the Agni launch, the Indian Armed Forces had been
structured for a strictly defensive role to safeguard our
nation, to shield our democratic processes from the
turbulence in the countries around us and to raise the cost
of any external intervention to an unacceptable level for
countries which may entertain such notions. With Agni,
India had reached the stage where she had the option of
preventing wars involving her.
Agni marked the completion of five years of IGMDP.
Now that it had demonstrated our competence in the crucial
area of re-entry technology and with tactical missiles like
Prithvi and Trishul already testfired, the launches of Nag
and Akash would take us into areas of competence where
there is little or no international competition. These two
missile systems contained within themselves the stuff of
major technological breakthroughs. There was a need to
focus our efforts more intensively on them.
In September 1989, I was invited by the Maharashtra
Academy of Sciences in Bombay to deliver the Jawaharlal
Nehru Memorial Lecture. I used this opportunity to share
with the budding scientists my plans of making an
indigenous Air-to-Air missile, Astra. It would dovetail with
the development of the Indian Light Combat Aircraft (LCA).
I told them that our work in Imaging Infra Red (IIR) and
Millimetric Wave (MMW) radar technology for the Nag
missile system had placed us in the vanguard of
international R&D efforts in missile technology. I also drew
their attention to the crucial role that carbon-carbon and
other advanced composite materials play in mastering the
re-entry technology. Agni was the conclusion of a
technological effort that was given its start by Prime
Minister Indira Gandhi when the country decided to break
free from the paralysing fetters of technological
backwardness and slough off the dead skin of
subordination to industrialized nations.
The second flight of Prithvi at the end of September
1988 was again a great success. Prithvi has proved to be
the best surface-to-surface missile in the world today. It can
carry 1000 kg of warhead to a distance of 250 km and
deliver it within a radius of 50 metres. Through computer
controlled operations, numerous warhead weight and
delivery distance combinations can be achieved in a very
short time and in battlefield conditions. It is a hundred per
cent indigenous in all respects - design, operations,
deployment. It can be produced in large numbers as the
production facilities at BDL were concurrently developed
during the development phase itself. The Army was quick to
recognize the potential of this commendable effort and
approached the CCPA for placing orders for Prithvi and
Trishul missile systems, something that had never
* * * WINGS OF FIRE ORIENTATION - 1
[ 1991 - ]
We create and destroy
In forms of which no one knows.

n Republic Day 1990, the nation celebrated the success
of its missile programme. I was conferred the Padma
Vibhushan along with Dr Arunachalam. Two of my other
JC Bhattacharya and RN Agarwal - were also
decorated with the Padma Shree awards. It was the first
time in the history of free India that so many scientists
affiliated to the same organization found their names on the
awards list. Memories of the Padma Bhushan awarded a
decade ago came alive. I still lived more or less as I had
lived then - in a room ten feet wide and twelve feet long,
furnished mainly with books, papers and a few pieces of
hired furniture. The only difference was at that time, my
room was in Trivandrum and now it was in Hyderabad. The
mess bearer brought me my breakfast of idlis and
buttermilk and smiled in silent congratulation for the award.
I was touched by the recognition bestowed on me by my
countrymen. A large number of scientists and engineers
leave this country at their first opportunity to earn more
money abroad. It is true that they definitely get greater
monetary benefits, but could anything compensate for this
love and respect from one's own countrymen?
I sat alone for a while in silent contemplation. The sand and
Rameswaram, the care of Iyadurai Solomon in
Ramanathapuram, the guidance of Rev. Father Sequeira in
Trichi and Prof. Pandalai in Madras, the encouragement of
Dr Mediratta in Bangalore, the hovercraft ride with Prof.
Menon, the pre-dawn visit to the Tilpat Range with Prof.
Sarabhai, the healing touch of Dr Brahm Prakash on the
day of the SLV3 failure, the national jubilation on the SLV-3
launch, Madam Gandhi's appreciative smile, the post-SLV-
3 simmering at VSSC, Dr Ramanna's faith in inviting me to
DRDO, the IGMDP, the creation of RCI, Prithvi, Agni...a
flood of memories swept over me. Where were all these
men now? My father, Prof. Sarabhai, Dr Brahm Prakash? I
wished I could meet them and share my joy with them. I felt
the paternal forces of heaven and the maternal and cosmic
forces of nature embrace me as parents would hug their
long-lost child. I scribbled in my diary:
Away! fond thoughts, and vex my soul no more!
Work claimed my wakeful nights, my busy days
Albeit brought memories of Rameswaram shore
Yet haunt my dreaming gaze!
A fortnight later, Iyer and his team celebrated the
awards for the missile programme with the maiden flight of
Nag. They repeated the feat again on the very next day,
thus testing twice over the first Indian all-composite
airframe and the propulsion system. These tests also
proved the worth of the indigenous thermal batteries.
India had achieved the status of having a third
generation anti-tank missile system with 'fire-and-forget'
capability - on par with any stateof-the-art technology in the
world. Indigenous composite technology had achieved a
major milestone. The success of Nag also confirmed the
efficacy of the consortium approach, which had led to the
successful development of Agni.
Nag uses two key technologies - an Imaging Infra Red
(IIR) system and a Millimetric Wave (MMW) seeker radar
as its guiding eye. No single laboratory in the country
possessed the capability of developing these highly
advanced systems. But the urge to succeed existed, which
resulted in a very effective joint effort. The Semi Conductor
Complex at Chandigarh developed the Charge Coupled
Devices (CCD) array. The Solid Physics Laboratory, Delhi,
made the matching Mercury Cadmium Telluride (MCT)
detectors. The Defence Science Centre (DSC), Delhi, put
together an indigenous cooling system based on the Joules
Thomson effect. The transmitter receiver front end was
devised at the Defence Electronics Application Laboratory
The special gallium arsenide gun, schottky barrier mixer
diodes, compact comparator for antenna system - India
was banned from buying any one of these high technology
devices, but innovation cannot be suppressed by
I went to Madurai Kamaraj University the same month to
deliver their convocation address. When I reached
Madurai, I asked after my high school teacher Iyadurai
Solomon, who was by now a Reverend and eighty years
old. I was told that he lived in a suburb of Madurai, so I took
a taxi and looked for his house. Rev. Solomon knew that I
was going to give the convocation address that day.
However, he had no way of getting there. There was a
touching reunion between teacher and pupil. Dr PC
Alexander, the Governor of Tamil Nadu, who was presiding
over the function, was deeply moved on seeing the elderly
teacher who had not forgotten his pupil of long ago, and
requested him to share the dais.
"Every convocation day of every University is like
opening the floodgates of energy which, once harnessed by
institutions, organ-izations and industry, aids in nation-
building," I told the young graduates. Somehow I felt I was
echoing Rev. Solomon's words, spoken about half a
century ago. After my lecture, I bowed down before my
teacher. "Great dreams of great dreamers are always
transcended," I told Rev. Solomon. "You have not only
reached my goals, Kalam! You have eclipsed them," he told
me in a voice choked with emotion.
The next month, I happened to be in Trichi and used that
opportunity to visit St. Joseph's College. I did not find Rev.
Father Sequeira, Rev. Father Erhart, Prof. Subramanyam,
Prof. Iyyamperumal Konar, or Prof. Thothathri Iyengar there,
but it seemed to me that the stones of the St. Joseph's
building still carried the imprint of the wisdom of those great
people. I shared with the young students my memories of
St. Joseph's and paid tribute to the teachers who had
We celebrated the nation's forty-fourth Independence
Day with the test firing of Akash. Prahlada and his team
evaluated a new solid propellant booster system based on
a composite modified double base propellant. This
propellant with its unprecedented high energy properties
was crucial in assuring the long-range surface-to-air
missiles. The country had taken an important step in
ground-based air defence of vulnerable areas.
Towards the end of 1990, Jadavpur University
conferred on me the honour of Doctor of Science at a
special convocation. I was a little embarrassed at finding
my name mentioned along with that of the legendary Nelson
Mandela, who was also honoured at the same convocation.
What could I possible have in common with a legend like
Mandela? Perhaps it was our persistence in our missions.
My mission of advancing rocketry in my country was
perhaps nothing when compared with Mandela's mission of
achieving dignity for a great mass of humanity; but there
was no difference in the intensity of our passions. "Be more
dedicated to making solid achievements than in running
after swift but synthetic happiness," was my advice to the
The Missile Council declared 1991 the Year of Initiative
for DRDL and RCI. When we chose the route of concurrent
engineering in IGMDP, we selected a rough track. With the
completion of developmental trials on Prithvi and Trishul,
our choice was on test now. I exhorted my colleagues to
commence user trials within the year. I knew that it was
going to be a tough task, but that was not going to
Rear Admiral Mohan retired and his deputy, Kapoor,
was to take over Trishul. I had always admired Mohan's
understanding of missile command guidance. This sailor-
teacher-scientist could outwit any other expert in the country
in this field. I will always remember his candid exposition of
various aspects of the Command Line of Sight (CLOS)
guidance system during the Trishul meetings. Once, he
showed me a verse that he had composed to highlight the
woes of an IGMDP Project Director. It was a good way of
PERT charts to boot
Are driving me almost crazy as a coot;
Presentations to MC add to one's woes,
If they solve anything, Heaven only knows.
Meetings on holidays, even at night,
The family is fed up,
And all ready to fight.
My hands are itching
to tear my hair -
But alas! I haven't any more to tear ...
I told him, "I have handed over all my problems to my
best teams in DRDL, RCI, and other participating labs.
That has given me a full head of hair."
The year 1991 began on a very ominous note. On the
night of 15 January 1991, the Gulf War broke out between
Iraq and the Allied Forces led by the USA. In one stroke,
thanks to satellite television invading Indian skies by that
time, rockets and missiles captured the imagination of the
entire nation. People started discussing Scuds and
Patriots in coffee houses and tea shops. Children began
flying paper kites shaped like missiles, and playing war
games along the lines of what they saw on American
television networks. The successful test firing of Prithvi and
Trishul during the course of the Gulf War was enough to
make an anxious nation relax. The newspaper reports of
the programmable trajectory capability of the Prithvi and
Trishul guidance system, using microwave frequencies in
virtually unjammable bands, created widespread
awareness. The nation was quick to draw parallels
between the missiles operational in the Gulf War and our
own warhead carriers. A common query I encountered was
whether Prithvi was superior to a Scud, whether Akash
could perform like a Patriot, and so on. Hearing a "Yes" or
a "Why not?" from me, people's faces would light up with
The Allied Forces had a marked technological edge, as
they were fielding systems built using the technologies of
the eighties and nineties. Iraq was fighting with the by-and-
large vintage weapon systems of the sixties and seventies.
Now, this is where the key to the modern world order
lies - superiority through technology. Deprive the opponent
of the latest technology and then dictate your terms in an
unequal contest. When the Chinese war philosopher, Sun
Tzu ruminated over 2000 years ago that what matters in
war is not decimating the enemy army physically but
breaking his will so as to make him concede defeat in the
mind, he seems to have visualized the domination of
technology in the twentieth century theatres of war. The
missile force coupled with the electronic warfare used in
the Gulf War was a feast for military strategic experts. It
acted as a curtainraiser for the twenty-first century war
scenario with missiles and electronic and information
warfare playing the lead roles.
In India, even today, the term technology, for most
people, conjures up images of smoky steel mills or clanking
machines. This is a rather inadequate conception of what
technology denotes. The invention of the horse collar in the
Middle Ages led to major changes in agricultural methods,
and was as much a technological advance as the invention
of the Bessemer furnace centuries later. Moreover,
technology includes techniques as well as the machines
that may or may not be necessary to apply them. It includes
ways to make chemical reactions occur, ways to breed fish,
eradicate weeds, light theatres, treat patients, teach
history, fight wars, or even prevent them.
Today, most advanced technological processes are
carried out far from assembly lines or open hearths. Indeed,
in electronics, in space technology, in most of the new
industries, relative silence and clean surroundings are
characteristic, even essential. The assembly line, with the
organization of armies of men, to carry out simple, routine
functions is an anachronism. Our symbols of technology
must change before we can keep pace with changes in
technology itself. We should never forget that technology
feeds on itself. Technology makes more technology
possible. In fact, technological innovation consists of three
stages linked together in a self-reinforcing cycle. First,
there is the creative stage, with the blueprint of a feasible
idea. This is made real by its practical application, and this
finally ends in its diffusion through society. The process is
then complete; the loop is closed when the diffusion of
technology embodying the new idea in its turn helps
generate new creative ideas. Today, all over the developed
world, the time gap between each of the steps in this cycle
has been shortened. In India, we are just progressing
towards that stage - closing the loop.
After the Gulf War concluded with the victory of the
technologically superior Allied Forces, over 500 scientists
of DRDL and RCI gathered to discuss issues that had
emerged. I posed a question before the assembly: was
technology or weapon symmetry with other nations feasible,
and if so, should it be attempted? The discussion led to
many more serious questions, such as, how to establish
effective electronic warfare support? How to make missile
development proceed apace with the development of
equally necessary systems like the LCA; and what were the
key areas where a push would bring progress?
At the end of a lively discussion spread over three
hours, the consensus emerged that there was no way to
redress asymmetry in military capability except to have the
same capability in specific areas as your potential
opponent. The scientists vowed to achieve a reduced CEP
in the accuracy of Prithvi's delivery, perfecting the Ka band
guidance system for Trishul and realising all carbon-carbon
re-entry control surfaces for Agni by the end of the year. The
vow was later fulfilled. The year also saw tubelaunched Nag
flights, and the manoeuvre of Trishul at seven metres above
sea level, at speeds which exceeded three times the speed
of sound. The latter was a breakthrough in the development
of an indigenous ship-launched anti-sea-skimmer missile.
The same year, I received an honorary degree of
Doctor of Science from the IIT, Bombay. In the citation read
by Prof. B Nag on the occasion, I was described as "an
inspiration behind the creation of a solid technological
base from which India's future aerospace programmes can
be launched to meet the challenges of the twenty-first
century". Well, perhaps Prof. Nag was only being polite, but
I do believe that India will enter the next century with its own
satellite in geo-stationary orbit 36,000 km away in space,
positioned by its own launch vehicle. India will also become
a missile power. Ours is a country with tremendous vitality.
Even though the world may not see its full potential or feel
its full power, no one dare ignore it any more.
On 15 October, I turned sixty. I looked forward to
retirement and planned to open a school for the less
privileged children. My friend, Prof. P Rama Rao, who was
heading the Department of Science and Technology in the
Government of India, even struck up a partnership with me
to establish what he called the Rao-Kalam school. We were
unanimous in our opinion that carrying out certain missions
and reaching certain milestones, however important they
may be or however impressive they might appear to be, is
not all there is to life. But we had to postpone our plan as
neither of us was relieved from our post by the Government
It was during this period that I decided to put down my
memoirs and express my observations and opinions on
The biggest problem Indian youth faced, I felt, was a
lack of clarity of vision, a lack of direction. It was then that I
decided to write about the circumstances and people who
made me what I am today; the idea was not merely to pay
tribute to some individuals or highlight certain aspects of
my life. What I wanted to say was that no one, however
poor, underprivileged or small, need feel disheartened
about life. Problems are a part of life. Suffering is the
essence of success. As someone said:
God has not promised
All our life through;
God has not promised
I will not be presumptuous enough to say that my life can
be a role model for anybody; but some poor child living in
an obscure place, in an underprivileged social setting may
find a little solace in the way my destiny has been shaped. It
could perhaps help such children liberate themselves from
the bondage of their illusory backwardness and
hopelessness. Irrespective of where they are right now, they
should be aware that God is with them and when He is with
them, who can be against them?
But God has promised
Strength for the day,
Rest for the labour
Light for the way.
It has been my observation that most Indians suffer
unnecessary misery all their lives because they do not know
how to manage their emotions. They are paralysed by
some sort of a psychological inertia. Phrases like 'the next
best alternative', 'the only feasible option or solution', and
'till things take a turn for the better' are commonplace in our
business conversations. Why not write about the deep-
rooted character traits which manifest themselves in such
widespread, selfdefeatist thought patterns and negative
behaviour? I have worked with many people and
organizations and have had to deal with people who were
so full of their own limitations that they had no other way to
prove their self-worth than by intimidating me. Why not write
about the victimization which is a hallmark of the tragedy of
Indian science and technology? And about the pathways to
organizational success? Let the latent fire in the heart of
every Indian acquire wings, and the glory of this great
country light up the sky.

echnology, unlike science, is a group activity. It is not
based on individual intelligence, but on the interaction of
many people. I think the biggest success of IGMDP is not
the fact that in
record time the country acquired the capability of
making five state-ofthe-art missile systems but that through
it, some superb teams of scientists and engineers have
been created. If someone asks me about my personal
achievements in Indian rocketry, I would put it down to
having created a challenging environment for teams of
young people to work in.
In their formative stages, teams are much like children
in spirit. They are as excitable, as full of vitality, enthusiasm,
curiosity and the desire to please and excel. As with
children, however, these positive attributes can be
destroyed by the behaviour of misguided parents. For
teams to be successful, the environment must offer scope
for innovation. I confronted many such challenges during the
course of my work at DTD&P (Air), ISRO, DRDO and
elsewhere, but always ensured for my teams an
environment which allowed innovation and risk-taking.
When we first began creating project teams during the
SLV-3 project and later in IGMDP, people working in these
teams found themselves in the frontline of their
organizations' ambitions. Since a great deal of
psychological investment had been made in these teams,
they became both highly visible and highly vulnerable. They
were personally expected to make a disproportionate
contribution to win collective glory.
I was aware that any failure in the organizational support
system would negate the investment in team strategies.
The teams would be relegated to the league of average
working groups and might fail even there, unable to meet
the high expectations set for them. On several occasions,
the organization was on the verge of losing its nerve and
imposing restraints. The high level of uncertainty and
complexity associated with team activity very often proves
to be a trap for the unwary.
In the early years of the SLV-3 project, I often had to
counter nervousness of the top people because progress
was not tangibly or immediately visible. Many felt that the
organization had lost control over SLV-3, that the team
would run on unchecked, and cause chaos and confusion.
But on all occasions, these fears were proved imaginary.
There were many people in powerful positions in
organizations, for example at VSSC, who underestimated
our responsibility and commitment to organizational
objectives. Dealing with such people was a crucial part of
the whole operation, and this was performed dexterously by
When you work as a project team, you need to develop
a complex view of the success criteria. There are always
multiple and often conflicting sets of expectations that exist
about a team's performance. Then, quite often, the project
teams are virtually torn apart in their attempt to
accommodate the needs and constraints of sub-
contractors outside the organization and specialist
departments within the organization. Good project teams
are able to quickly identify the key person or people with
whom negotiations must take place. A crucial aspect of the
team leader's role is to negotiate with these key people for
their requirements, and to ensure that the dialogue
continues on a regular basis as the situation develops or
changes. If there is one thing outsiders dislike, it is
unpleasant surprises. Good teams ensure that there are
The SLV-3 team developed their own internal success
criteria. We articulated our standards, expectations and
objectives. We summarised what was needed to happen
for us to be successful and how we would measure
success. For instance, how we were going to accomplish
our tasks, who would do what and according to what
standards, what were the time limits and how would the
team conduct itself with reference to others in the
The process of arriving at the success criteria within a
team is an intricate and skilled one because there are a lot
of things going on below the surface. On the surface, the
team is simply working to achieve the project's goals. But I
have repeatedly seen how people are poor at articulating
what they want - until they see a work centre doing
something they don't want them to do. A project team
member must in fact act like a detective. He should probe
for clues as to how the project is proceeding, and then
piece together different bits of evidence to build up a clear,
comprehensive and deep understanding of the project's
At another level, the relationship between the project
teams and the work centres should be encouraged and
developed by the project leader. Both parties must be very
clear in their minds about their mutual interdependence and
the fact that both of them have a stake in the project. At yet
another level, each side should assess the other's
capabilities and identify areas of strength and weakness in
order to plan what needs doing and how it should be done.
In fact, the whole game can be seen as a process of
contracting. It is about exploring and arriving at an
agreement on what each party expects of the other; about
realistically understanding the constraints of the other party;
and about communicating the success criteria while
defining some simple rules about how the relationship is to
work; but above all, it's the best means of developing clarity
in the relationship, both at the technical and personal levels,
in order to avoid any nasty surprises in the future. In
IGMDP, Sivathanu Pillai and his team did some
remarkable work in this area through their home-grown
technique, PACE, which stands for Programme Analysis,
Control and Evaluation. Each day between 12 noon and 1
p.m., they would sit with a project team and a particular
work centre that was on the critical path and assess the
level of success among themselves. The excitement of
planning ways to succeed and the vision of future success
provide an irresistible form of motivation which, I have
found, always makes things happen.
The concept of Technology Management has its roots in
the Developmental Management models which originated
in the early Sixties out of a conflict between harmony-
seeking and output-oriented management structures. There
are basically two types of management orientations: primal,
which values an economic employee, and rational, which
values an organizational employee. My concept of
management is woven around an employee who is a
technology person. While the primal management school
recognizes people for their independence, and rational
management acknowledges them for their dependability, I
value them for their interdependence. Whereas the primal
manager champions independent enterprise and the
rational manager serves cooperation, I moot
interdependent joint ventures, getting the forces together,
networking people, resources, time schedules, costs, and
Abraham Maslow was the first person to suggest the
new psychology of self-actualization at a conceptual level. In
Europe, Rudolf Steiner and Reg Revans developed this
concept into the system of individual learning and
organizational renewal. The Anglo-German management
philosopher, Fritz Schumacher introduced Buddhist
economics and authored the concept of "Small is
Beautiful". In the Indian subcontinent, Mahatma Gandhi
emphasized grass root level technology and put the
customer at the centre of the entire business activity. JRD
Tata brought in progressdriven infrastructure. Dr Homi
Jehangir Bhabha and Prof. Vikram Sarabhai launched the
high, technology-based atomic energy and space
programmes with a clear-cut emphasis on the natural laws
of totality and flow. Advancing the developmental
philosophy of Dr Bhabha and Prof. Sarabhai, Dr MS
Swaminathan ushered the Green Revolution into India
working on another natural principle of integrity. Dr
Verghese Kurien brought in a powerful cooperative
movement through a revolution in the dairy industry. Prof.
Satish Dhawan developed mission management concepts
in space research. These are but a few examples of
individuals who have not only articulated but also
implemented their ideas, thus changing forever the face of
research and business organizations all over the world.
In the IGMDP, I attempted to integrate the vision of Prof.
Sarabhai and the mission of Prof. Dhawan by adapting the
high technology setting of Dr Brahm Prakash's space
research. I attempted to add the natural law of Latency in
founding the Indian Guided Missile Programme in order to
create a completely indigenous variety of technology
management. Let me use a metaphor to illuminate this.
The tree of technology management takes root only if
there is the self-actualization of needs, renewal,
interdependence, and natural flow. The growth patterns are
characteristic of the evolution process, which means that
things move in a combination of slow change and sudden
transformation; each transformation causes either a leap
into a new, more complex level or a devastating crash to
some earlier level; dominant models reach a certain peak
of success when they turn troublesome; and the rate of
The stem of the tree is the molecular structure in which
all actions are formative, all policies are normative, and all
decisions are integrative. The branches of this tree are
resources, assets, operations, and products which are
nourished by the stem through a continuous performance
evaluation and corrective update.
This tree of technology management, if carefully tended,
bears the fruits of an adaptive infrastructure: technological
empowerment of the institutions, the generation of technical
skills among people, and finally self-reliance of the nation
and improvement in the quality of life of its citizenry.
When IGMDP was sanctioned in 1983, we did not have
an adequate technology base. A few pockets of expertise
were available, but we lacked the authority to utilize that
expert technology. The multi-project environment of the
programme provided a challenge, for five advanced missile
systems had to be simultaneously developed. This
demanded judicious sharing of resources, establishing
priorities, and ongoing induction of manpower. Eventually,
the IGMDP had 78 partners, including 36 technology
centres and 41 production centres spread over public
sector undertakings, ordnance factories, private industries,
and professional societies, hand-in hand with a well-knit
bureaucratic structure in the Government. In the
management of the Programme, as much as in the
technological inputs, we attempted to develop a model that
was appropriate, even tailor-made, for our very specific
needs and capabilities. We borrowed ideas that had been
developed elsewhere, but adapted them in the light of what
we knew were our strengths and what we recognized as the
constraints we would be compelled to work under. All in all,
the combination of appropriate management and our
cooperative endeavours helped to unearth the talent and
potential that lay unused in our research laboratories,
government institutions and private industries.
The Technology Management philosophy of IGMDP is
not exclusive to missile development. It represents the
national urge to succeed and an awareness that the world
will never again be directed by muscle or money power. In
fact, both these powers will depend on technological
excellence. Technology respects only technology. And, as I
said in the beginning, technology, unlike science, is a group
activity. It does not grow only through individual intelligence,
but by intelligences interacting and ceaselessly individual
intelligence, but by intelligences interacting and ceaselessly
strong Indian family which also makes missile systems.
There has been much speculation and philosophizing
about the life and times of our scientists, but not enough
exploration in determining where they wanted to go and
how they reached there. In sharing with you the story of my
struggle to become a person, I have perhaps given you
some insight into this journey. I hope it will help at least a
few young people to stand up to the authoritarianism in our
society. A characteristic feature of this social
authoritarianism is its insidious ability to addict people to
the endless pursuit of external rewards, wealth, prestige,
position, promotion, approval of one's lifestyle by others,
ceremonial honours, and status symbols of all kinds.
To successfully pursue these goals, they have to learn
elaborate rules of etiquette and familiarize themselves with
customs, traditions, protocols and so on. The youth of today
must unlearn this self-defeating way of life. The culture of
working only for material possessions and rewards must be
discarded. When I see wealthy, powerful and learned
people struggling to be at peace with themselves, I
remember people like Ahmed Jallaluddin and Iyadurai
Solomon. How happy they were with virtually no
On the coast of Coromandel
Where the earthy shells blow,
In the middle of the sands
Lived some really rich souls.
One cotton lungi and half a candle -
One old jug without a handle
These were all the worldly possessions
Of these kings in the middle of the sands.
How did they feel so secure without anything to fall back
upon? I believe they drew sustenance from within. They
relied more on the inner signals and less on the external
cues that I have mentioned above. Are you aware of your
inner signals? Do you trust them? Have you taken control
over your life into your own hands? Take this from me, the
more decisions you can make avoiding external pressures,
which will constantly try to manipulate you, the better your
life will be, the better your society will become. Infact the
entire nation will benefit by having strong, inwardlooking
people as their leaders. A citizenry that thinks for itself, a
country of people who trust themselves as individuals,
would be virtually immune to manipulation by any
unscrupulous authority or vested interest.
Your willingness to use your own inner resources to
invest in your life, especially your imagination, will bring you
success. When you address a task from your own uniquely
individual standpoint, you become a whole person.
Everyone on this planet is sent forth by Him to cultivate
all the creative potential within us and live at peace with our
own choices. We differ in the way we make our choices
and evolve our destiny. Life is a difficult game. You can win
only by retaining your birthright to be a person. And to retain
this right, you will have to be willing to take the social or
external risks involved in ignoring pressures to do things
the way others say they should be done. What will you call
Sivasubramania Iyer inviting me to have lunch in his
kitchen? Zohara, my sister, mortgaging her gold bangles
and chains to get me into engineering college? Prof.
Sponder insisting that I should sit with him in the front row
for the group photograph? Making a hovercraft in a motor-
garage setup? Sudhakar's courage? Dr Brahm Prakash's
support? Narayanan's management? Venkataraman's
vision? Arunachalam's drive? Each is an example of a
strong inner strength and initiative. As Pythagoras had said
twenty-five centuries ago, "Above all things, reverence
I am not a philosopher. I am only a man of technology. I
spent all my life learning rocketry. But as I have worked with
a very large crosssection of people in different
organizations, I had an opportunity to understand the
phenomenon of professional life in its bewildering
complexity. When I look back upon what I have narrated so
far, my own observations and conclusions appear as
dogmatic utterances. My colleagues, associates, leaders;
the complex science of rocketry; the important issues of
technology management; all seem to have been dealt with
in a perfunctory manner. The despair and happiness, the
achievements and the failures - differing markedly in
context, time, and space - all appear grouped together.
When you look down from an aircraft, people, houses,
rocks, fields, trees, all appear as one homogeneous
landscape, it is very difficult to distinguish one from another.
What you have just read is a similar bird'seye view of my
life seen, as it were, from afar.
My worthiness is all my doubt -
His merit - all my fear -
Contrasting which my quality
Does however - appear.
This is the story of the period ending with the first Agni
launch - life will go on. This great country will make
enormous strides in all fields if we think like a united nation
of 900 million people. My story - the story of the son of
Jainulabdeen, who lived for over a hundred years on
Mosque Street in Rameswaram island and died there; the
story of a lad who sold newspapers to help his brother; the
story of a pupil reared by Sivasubramania Iyer and Iyadurai
Solomon; the story of a student taught by teachers like
Pandalai; the story of an engineer spotted by MGK Menon
and groomed by the legendary Prof. Sarabhai; the story of
a scientist tested by failures and setbacks; the story of a
leader supported by a large team of brilliant and dedicated
professionals. This story will end with me, for I have no
belongings in the worldly sense. I have acquired nothing,
built nothing, possess nothing - no family, sons, daughters.
I am a well in this great land
Looking at its millions of boys and girls
To draw from me
And spread His grace everywhere
As does the water drawn from a well.
I do not wish to set myself up as an example to others,
but I believe that a few readers may draw inspiration and
come to experience that ultimate satisfaction which can
only be found in the life of the spirit. God's providence is
your inheritance. The bloodline of my greatgrandfather Avul,
my grandfather Pakir, and my father Jainulabdeen may end
with Abdul Kalam, but His grace will never cease, for it is
WINGS OF FIRE ORIENTATION - 1
earnestly hope and pray that the development resulting
from these two plans - Self Reliance Mission and
Technology Vision - 2020 - will eventually make our
country strong and prosperous and take our rightful place
among the ranks of the "developed" nations.
This book is interwoven with my deep involvement with
India's first Satellite Launch Vehicle SLV-3 and Agni
Programmes, an involvement which eventually led to my
participation in the recent important national event related
to the nuclear tests in May, 1998. I have had the great
opportunity and honour of working with three scientific
establishments - Space, Defence Research and Atomic
Energy. I found, while working in these establishments, that
the best of human beings and the best of innovative minds
were available in plenty. One feature common to all three
establishments, is that the scientists and technologists
were never afraid of failures during their missions. Failures
contain within themselves the seeds of further learning
which can lead to better technology, and eventually, to a
high level of success. These people were also great
dreamers and their dreams finally culminated in
spectacular achievements. I feel that if we consider the
combined technological strength of all these scientific
institutions, it would certainly be comparable to the best
found anywhere in the world. Above all, I have had the
opportunity of working with the great visionaries of the
nation, namely Prof. Vikram Sarabhai, Prof. Satish Dhawan
and Dr Brahm Prakash, each of whom have greatly
A nation needs both economic prosperity and strong
security for growth and development. Our Self Reliance
Mission in Defence System 1995- 2005 will provide the
Armed Forces with a state-of-the-art competitive weapons
system. The Technology Vision - 2020 plan will put into
place certain schemes and plans for the economic growth
and prosperity of the nation. These two plans have evolved
out of the nation's dreams. I

Unleashing the Power within India
1. The Dream and the Message
2. Give Us a Role Model
3. Visionary Teachers and Scientists
4. Learning from Saints and Seers
5. Patriotism beyond Politics and Religion
6. The Knowledge Society
7. Getting the Forces Together
8. Building a New State
9. To My Countrymen
A.P.J. Abdul Kalam is one of India's most distinguished
responsible for the development of
the development and operationalization of strategic
of the Technology Information,
2020, focusing on PURA as a development
Research and Development Organisation and became
India, holding the rank of a cabinet
The President of India between 2002 and 2007,
Kalam has been awarded
Padma Vibhushan (1990) and Bharat
research on different societal missions.
PRAISE FOR THE BOOK
lies in the scientist's ability to present some of
the most tangled issues that confront the nation in easily digestible packages of
'Kalam is a dreamer of great dreams
will fire the minds of the
young to whom it is primarily addressed.'
'It is not possible in [a] short review to convey the vast erudition of a man who
covers so much of India's past, present and future in such simple, communicable
terms. Or his many revolutionary as well as practical ideas for the country which
he so obviously loves, of which he is so proud and which he feels can be the
country of his dreams by 2020.'
is a book to be read by the leaders and led, by young as well as
old and by all who love their country Kalam[dares] to say what has long
needed to be said but which has gone unsaid '
is a lucid and elegant expression of [Kalam's] dreams about
India's future This is a feel-good book. It is a true patriot's self-help guide to

I dedicate this book to a child who is studying in class 12. Her name is Snehal
Thakkar. On 11 April 2002 when I reached Anand by road in the evening, it was
under curfew following communal disturbances. The next day, at the Anandalaya
High School, while talking to the students, a question came up: 'Who is our

There were many answers, but the one we all agreed was correct came from her:
'Our enemy is Poverty.'

It is the root cause of our problems and should be the object of our fight, not our
Nations consist of people. And with their effort a nation can accomplish all it
could ever want. Motivating India's people, and its youth especially, is the
which continues the trajectory of thoughts taken
up in my earlier two books,
India 2020: A Vision for the New
written with my friends Arun Tiwari and Y.S. Rajan. I have chosen
to write about this subject of igniting young minds so that India turns into a
developed nation by the year 2020 because all through my career in the field of
technology and its management, I relied on the power and potential of youth. My
strength has been my
young teams who never let me down. And what
satisfaction there was in working with them on some of the most complex
projects in some of the most challenging situations! Given the freedom to
achieve and guided properly, I am convinced the young of India can accomplish
As I began writing, I wondered if I was not overreaching myself. I thought:
Who am I to write about this capacity of India to realize its destiny as a
developed nation? What do I really know about how this can be accomplished
beyond what I have learned in my projects and missions evolved around science
and technology? Isn't this an area that political leaders, economists, thinkers and
other competent people would address better? How am I qualified to tell others
about an ability that has been generally ignored?
At first as I was putting down my experiences with youth, I had no idea of
what I would have to say. However, I put aside my doubts and began to examine
what I hear from the people I meet during my
visits to different places,
particularly children, saints and seers, teachers, scientists, industry leaders and
even political leaders. I am sure on my part that India has the ability to transform
itself into a developed nation. Through my projects in space, defence and nuclear
sectors, I know that our people have the ability to achieve the best in the world.
They have a fantastic mix of belief and knowledge that sets them apart from any
other nation on earth. I also know that their potential has gone untapped because
we have become used to being subjugated and docile. What better project can I
undertake than to tell my people that what they dream of can become possible,
that they can have anything that comprises a good life: health, education, the
freedom to pursue their goals, and above all, peace.
My quest for answers as to how this could be done took me to schools, the
countryside, ashrams and many other places which were not part of my itinerary
earlier. It was a new kind of experience, a very stimulating one at that. The
Bihar left to an ad-hoc cycle of agriculture, the untapped mineral
wealth of the newly formed state of Jharkhand and the unattended biodiversity of
Tripura are throwing a great challenge to the knowledge era that is dawning. In
Assam the sight of the mighty Brahmaputra almost mesmerized me. Its vast
expanse of water filled me with a strange sense of helplessness too-the river's
untapped flow was taking a gigantic mass of water into the sea. It made me
think, that as a nation too we were failing to utilize our tremendous energies.
Where are we making a mistake? What is it that needs to be corrected? We
have a roadmap in our five-year plans that covers some of the things we need to
achieve. We have most of the necessary resources. There seems to be an attitude
problem, as if we cannot shake ourselves out of a mindset of limited
achievement. This book is all about breaking away from the forces that would
prefer us to remain a nation of a billion people selling cheap labour and raw
materials and providing a large market for
goods and services of other nations.
I am writing this book to make my young readers hear a voice that says, 'Start
moving.' Leadership must lead us to prosperity. Young Indians with constructive
ideas should not have to see them wither in the long wait for approval. They
have to rise above norms which are meant to keep them timid in the name of
safety and to discourage entrepreneurship in the name of trade regimes,
organizational order and group behaviour. As it is said, Thinking is the capital,
Enterprise is the way, Hard Work is the solution.
Every nation has struggled to achieve its goals. Generations have given their
best to make life better for their offspring. There is nothing mysterious or hidden
about this, no alternative to effort. And yet we fail to follow the winning track.
More than the problems outside-globalization, recession, inflation, insurgency,
instability and so on-I am concerned about the inertia that has gripped the
national psyche, the mindset of defeat. I believe that when we believe in our
that what we dream of can become reality, results will begin to follow.
is about developing that conviction in ourselves, and discarding
the things that hold us back.
This was, in fact, a central thought that I kept in mind as I wrote. Share my
dream of a developed India and see it made real in your own and others' lives. In
my own way, I have tried to follow my beliefs, to do what I loved doing. I have
tried, however, to guide but not to impose my views on others.
You will find in this book plain speaking: Surge ahead as a developed nation
or perish in perpetual poverty, subservient to a few countries that control the
world politically and economically. There are no other alternatives.
In the nine chapters of this book, I take up various themes. I begin with a
rumination on peace, without which there can be no progress, and on the shift in
the direction of my own life that occurred after surviving a helicopter crash.
There is a chapter based on my interaction with children all over India. Other
chapters contain the insights I
gained in my meetings with saints and seers,
scientists, outstanding thinkers and others. There are accounts of some promising
experiments in agriculture and in the medical field. Elsewhere I deal with
concepts that carry the seed of solutions. The contents essentially come from the
people of this nation, from what they have taught me.
I have written this book as an expression of my faith in the potential of India
and my countrymen. We have all the resources we need, whether it be people,
talent, natural bounty or other assets. India is truly blessed with a real, though
latent, abundance. Scarcity of resources is not the cause of our problems. Our
problems originate in our approach towards them. We are spreading our
resources too wide and too thin. With our resources and the money we spend we
could easily accomplish three times what we do, in half the time we normally
take, if we were to operate in mission mode with a vision for the nation. The
vision generates the best in every field.
We must change tracks. It is imperative
that our policy making become more
responsive and efficient so that the stifled entrepreneurship is liberated. Key to
that is better coordination among the various departments, rather than emphasis
on priorities according to the preferences of individual departments. There are
more reviews than views available. Every channel appears blocked by some
obstacle or the other. The trapped energies and the suppressed initiative need to
be freed and properly harnessed. Nor do we particularly need every time to
borrow models from elsewhere. I don't think the American, Japanese or
Singaporean solutions will work for us. Knocking at others' doors will be futile.
Instead of importing theories and transplanting concepts we need to grow our
own solutions. Instead of searching for answers outside we will have to look
I hope that when you go through these nine chapters you will be given the
guidance that I got from the people of my country and feel connected to the
wisdom that is so
special to this soil. The reality of a developed nation will
become part of your daily life. Twenty years from now I may not be around. But
I am sure many of you will be there to share in the glory of success and agree
that I was right in being so confident.
Many friends and associates helped me put this book together. I am grateful to
them all. My special thanks to Mr Y.S. Rajan, and Dr M.S. Vijayaraghavan for
shaping my thoughts with their vital inputs. Dr A. Sivathanu Pillai has worked
with me for a long time and his contribution has been both timely and invaluable
in giving shape to ideas and thoughts. I am fortunate to have his friendship. I am
grateful to Mr H. Sheridon who directly keyed in my dictations into his laptop
computer with outstanding skill. My co-author in
Tiwari, did his usual craftsmanship with words on the manuscript and I
appreciate every bit of that. It was a great pleasure to work with Mr Krishan
Chopra of Penguin Books. From the emanation of my thoughts to the book's
realization, his constant interaction was of great support.

The Dream and the Message

Dream transform into thoughts

And thoughts result in action
On 30 September 2001, I was on my way to Bokaro from Ranchi in Jharkhand
when the helicopter carrying me crashed moments before landing. It hit the earth
with a thud after its engine failed. All of us on board had a miraculous escape.
Grateful to God but unfazed by the incident, I went ahead with my scheduled
the students in Bokaro. At night, however, a panel of
doctors persuaded me to take a tranquillizer to alleviate my perceived shock. The
drug made me sleep hours ahead of my usual time-1 a.m. I also failed to rise at
my usual 6 a.m. and woke up only after eight o'clock.
It was, however, a disturbed sleep, and sometime in the middle of it, I fell to
thinking why the human race, the best of all of God's creations, has been so
deeply divided by violence. I imagined a conversation between five people who
together symbolize the finest attributes of the human mind and whom I admire
deeply. Through their conversation, I sought an answer. In this experience, much
more intense and vivid than a dream, though for want of a better word I shall
term it that, I saw myself in a desert with miles of sand all around. There was a
full moon and the desert was bathed in its light. Five men- Mahatma Gandhi,
Albert Einstein, Emperor Asoka, Abraham Lincoln and Caliph Omar- stood in a
circle, their clothes ruffled by the wind.
I felt myself dwarfed standing next to the majestic Emperor Asoka. Asoka led
two lives, one as a ruthless conqueror and the other as a compassionate ruler.
The man I stood beside was the one who had just returned from conquest. But
victory had been obtained at heavy cost: the battle of Kalinga claimed the lives
of at least 300,000 people and an equal number were wounded. I saw everyone
looking at Asoka who fell on his knees and removed his armour and crown. His
face was pale, reflecting the death surrounding him. He looked at the sky. He
saw the bright cool moon shining and God's grace pouring down on mother
earth. And he looked down at the horror he had created, making blood flow
everywhere. In that moment of beauty and horror-the silver moonlight and the
suffering and pain on the ground, when Nature itself seemed to speak out against
what he had wrought, Ahimsa Dharma was born. Emperor Asoka embraced
God's command to propagate love for human beings through this doctrine.
As I stood by, I wondered. Why the
Kalinga war, why the assassination of
Mahatma Gandhi and of Abraham Lincoln? Or many others like them? Has God
Almighty faltered in His Creation? Is the destruction of mankind essential for a
In that blissful silence the Mahatma spoke, 'Friends, the divine message we
are hearing is the message of creation. Since we all belong to planet earth, we
may give a message to mankind, how people of different races, religions and
languages can live peacefully and prosperously together.
'God Almighty has blessed us all with something unique that we passed on to
mankind through our deeds and efforts. Is that working? Is there any divine
message or doctrine? Divine beauty should enter the human soul and happiness
blossom in the body and mind. Is it possible?'
Asoka said, 'Friends, there is one thing I have realized, there is no victory in
causing suffering. Triumph is a peaceful kingdom.'
Caliph Omar said, 'I learned after I entered Jerusalem that all men are equal.
There is no point in forcing others to follow
your path. You will get only that
which is ordained for you. God alone is the sovereign.'
Caliph Omar never saw his position in terms of the special privileges that it
carried. To him government was a sacred trust and he did his best not to betray
that trust in any way.
It was Einstein's turn. 'I would like to recall my friend Werner Heisenberg's
view, "You know, in the West we have built a large, beautiful ship. It has all the
comforts in it, but one thing is missing: it has no compass and does not know
where to go. Men like Tagore and Gandhi and their spiritual forebears found the
compass. Why can this compass not be put in the human ship so that both can
Abraham Lincoln, the great American leader who fought against slavery and
whose life paralleled that of the Mahatma in certain respects, said at this point,
'There is one thing that I would like to say: happiness comes from a family's
prosperity at various levels. God's grace gives bliss to human lives. Happiness
and bliss are two important
components of a godly life on earth. Perhaps there is
so much conflict between peoples and nations because in our pursuit of
prosperity and power we have lost sight of ethical values. We must ask
ourselves, what is the role of human consciousness? Does it have a part in
political thinking, scientific thinking and theological thinking? Is spirituality
acceptable in the business of life?'
Mahatma Gandhi recalled sage Ashtavakra who propounded, '"Oh my son!
You are the very Consciousness within which arises this phenomenal universe
that is not separate from what you are. How can there be a question of anything
being acceptable or unacceptable?" Let the business of life be peace and
prosperity, and not exploitation and conflict.
'This is our message to the planet. Everything that we do, any doctrine that we
espouse, should be for the good of humankind.'
The next morning I kept sitting for some time drinking my tea and pondering
about this strange dream. What if the helicopter
had lost power at some more
height? Just a few hours before my own mishap, a plane carrying a promising
leader and a team of young and talented journalists had crashed, killing all. I had
been lucky to survive and now there was the night's experience that seemed to
hold a message for me. What should I do?
I looked out of the window. The sun was well up in the sky and there was a
soothing breeze. I have always lived in close touch with nature and have always
found it a friend, giving without reservation, like the mango tree-people throw
stones at it, break off its branches, but it still offers its shade to the weary
traveller, and its fruit to the hungry. Whether it was the sea at Rameswaram,
Thumba and Chandipur; the desert at Pokhran; or the gigantic boulders in
Hyderabad, nature has always made its presence felt wherever I have worked. It
has helped to remind me of the divine force that pervades all of creation.
I kept on pondering over my dream. And yet, the history of the world shows
forces of good struggling hard to make life better for mankind while the
human race also shows a terrible capacity for destruction. Thus we have Gandhi,
and other great saints and teachers who lay down the precepts for a happy and
virtuous life, on the one hand, and on the other the death of millions in the
Second World War and the dropping of atomic bombs that destroyed entire
cities. Thousands have died in the Bosnia conflict, the Israel - Palestine conflict
continues to take lives, and on 11 September 2001 terrorists used a new tactic to
take lives when they struck at the World Trade Center in New York. At home, in
the Bhopal gas tragedy, 30,000 people died as the result of the carelessness of a
multinational company, and thousands more have died in the Kashmir Valley
violence. On 13 December 2001, when the leaders of India were in Parliament,
an attempt was made by the terrorists to paralyse the country. Where will it all
stop? Are we doomed to destroy ourselves? No, we have to find an everlasting
I recall a poem I wrote a few years ago, 'The Tree of Life'.
'You, the human race are the best of my creations
You will live and live,
And give and give till you are united,
In happiness and pain!
My bliss will be born in you,
Love is a continuum,
That is the mission of humanity,
You will see every day in the Life Tree.
You learn and learn,
My best of creations.'
The five great human beings I saw in my dream lived at different times. In the
modern world, there are few examples of human beings who embody the
qualities that come from realizing the nature of the mind. Once a child asked me
if I had read the Mahabharata and if so, who my favourite character in it was.
The multifaceted characters in the epic represent almost every aspect of human
nature, good as well as bad. I told the child that I was particularly
character of Vidura, who showed grit against the wrongdoings of authority and
had the courage to differ when everyone else chose to surrender before the
Today, it is hard for us to find one true Vidura among our leaders. It is hard for
us to imagine such an enlightened being and even harder for us to aim for such
enlightenment. More discouraging still is the quality of public life today, the low
level of discourse and the presence of so much ego, anger, greed, jealousy, spite,
cruelty, lust, fear, anxiety and turmoil! I felt a new determination dawning inside
In this my most important decision I decided to help discover the nature of
India's true self in its children. My own work and indeed I as a person were
relegated to the background. My scientific career, my teams, my awards, all this
became secondary. I wanted instead to be a part of the eternal intelligence that is
India. I hoped to transcend myself and discover the inner, higher self that is in us
through my interaction with joyous children.
A man is said to pass through different stages in his lifetime. Dr Wayne W.
Dyer, in his book
, makes an interesting categorization of
them as athelete stage, warrior stage, statesperson stage and spirit stage. It
occurred to me that nations too make a similar transition and in extending this
analogy to them I have termed the last two stages big brother and self-
realization stages respectively. The stages do not follow in sequence necessarily;
they can be coexistent, with one aspect dominant.
In the first, athlete stage, a nation fresh from an independence struggle, or
some other transition, embarks on an energetic pursuit of performance and
achievement. This has happened in Japan, Singapore and Malaysia.
When a nation leaves this stage behind, it generally enters the warrior stage.
Proud of its achievements, it finds ways to demonstrate its superiority over
others, perhaps through conquest. Ego is the driving force. During this stage
people are busy with goals and achievements in competition with
as Dyer points out for the individual, generates anxiety. Convincing others of its
superiority becomes the theme.
In the next, big brother stage, the ego has been tamed somewhat and with its
newfound maturity awareness shifts to what is important to other nations and
societies. In the big brother stage the nation is still an achiever but it is not so
obsessed with proving its strength. The idea is to help others become better. The
erstwhile Soviet Union by its developmental role in some countries had adopted
this role. As with the individual, so too with the nation, the transition from the
warrior stage to the big brother stage is a rewarding but difficult exercise.
There is one stage even higher than this big brother stage. In this, a nation
recognizes its truest essence. It comes out of the wisdom that the earth is no
single nation's inheritance but of all, and its people are aware of the
responsibility of the individual towards his fellow human beings. This can be
called the realization stage, and India may have the potential to achieve it.
In my working career of forty-three years, I have changed my tasks in several
institutions. Change is crucial. It brings new thought; new thought leads to
innovative actions. On 15 August 2001, I took a decision to go for another
change. I mentioned my intention to Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee, who
asked me to rethink. I had spoken to him of my desire to be relieved on a few
earlier occasions too but he advised me to continue and prevailed.
As a rocket man too I worked with stages. Each stage is jettisoned after taking
the rocket further along its intended trajectory. I worked with the Indian Space
Research Organization (ISRO) during 1963 - 82. In 1980, India launched its first
satellite launch vehicle successfully that put the Rohini satellite into orbit and
became a member of the exclusive space club. I headed the team as Project
Director of the mission for SLV-3. Our success in this effort gave the nation
satellite launch vehicle technology and expertise in control, guidance, propulsion
and aerodynamics, besides the ability to design
various rocket systems. Above
all, this project enriched the organization with enhanced capabilities in design,
development and management systems integrating inputs from different
institutions such as R&D laboratories, industry and academia. And the
programme also gave leaders in technology and management. Today they are all
working in various space and defence programmes. This was my first stage, in
which I learnt leadership from three great teachers-Dr Vikram Sarabhai, Prof.
Satish Dhawan and Dr Brahm Prakash. This was the time of learning and
acquisition of knowledge for me.
The second stage could then be from 1982 in the Defence Research and
Development Organization (DRDO). Again it was teamwork against the
background of denial of technology through the instruments of the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCR) and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
(NPT). I had the opportunity to work with teams and DRDO labs that led to the
design, development, production and
operationalization of two strategic missiles.
These types of strategic missiles will not be available to India from any country,
no matter how friendly our relations with it. During this period, three new
laboratories and facilities, one in the area of missile technology called Research
Centre Imarat (RCI) at Hyderabad and two other missile test centres, one on the
mainland and the other on an island, near Chandipur on the coast of Bay of
Bengal, were born with excellent capabilities. In addition, the nation became
strong as capability in critical technologies emerged from laboratories and
academic institutions that helped us overcome the constraints of the MTCR. My
team could design and develop any type of missile system, including the
Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM).
During this stage, I have gone through many successes and some failures. I
learnt from failures and hardened myself with courage to face them. This was
my second stage, which taught me the crucial lesson of managing failures.
The third stage can be the participation in India's mission to become a
nuclear- weapon state with a great partnership between the Department of
Atomic Energy (DAE) and DRDO with the support of the armed forces. This
was a mission well accomplished.
However, when children ask me, 'What has given you happiness in your life
in the last forty years?' I say I get happiness when heart patients carry KR
coronary stent in their arteries and when the physically handicapped children
fitted with the lightweight Floor Reaction Orthosis (FRO) callipers find their
difficulties eased somewhat. Both of these came as spin-offs from missile
During this stage, I held the position of Chairman of the Technology
Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC) under the
Department of Science and Technology, for nearly two tenures (about eight
years). This period saw the creation of Technology Vision 2020 based on the
work of task teams consisting of 500 experts in all
who had available to them
inputs from 5,000 scientists and technologists from different fields. Later, the
Technology Vision document and the national security aspects got integrated and
the India Millennium Missions (IMM 2020) emerged. When I took over as
Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government of India, in November 1999, the
task was to do detailing and evolve a working plan for IMM 2020. It is indeed a
roadmap for transforming India into a developed country-the Second Vision of
the Nation. Certain experimental work on education, agriculture and also
development of a number of villages in an integrated way is currently
progressing. A Cabinet paper on the subject has been moved for approval of the
government. During this third stage, it was building technological strength with
institutional partnership, adapting technology to societal needs and formulating
the vision for the Nation that occupied me.
The helicopter mishap of 30 September 2001 made me realize that the time to
jettison the third stage had arrived. This thought
was further reinforced on 2
October, the birthday of Mahatma Gandhi, when I visited Mata
Amritanandamayi's Ashram at Kollam in Kerala. She emphasized the need to
integrate spirituality with education to create a new generation of leaders and
entrepreneurs. On 12 October 2001, three days before I would complete my
seventy orbits around the sun, I formally wrote to the Prime Minister about my
decision to retire and requested to be relieved in a month's time. He relented this
time and I prevailed.
Meanwhile I keep visiting schools. During my visits to many states,
particularly two of the north-eastern states, Assam and Tripura, and Jharkhand
and also a few places in Tamil Nadu, I have addressed thousands of students,
about 40,000 at last count. I have found that I communicate well with this age
group; I share their imagination. Most important, through my interaction with
them, I feel I can ignite in their minds a love for science, and through it, a sense
of mission for achieving a developed India.
Will this be my fourth stage? Shall I be successful? I really don't know. But
what I do know is that there is no greater power in heaven or on earth than the
commitment to a dream. Dreams hold something of that energy which lies at the
heart of all things and are the binding force that brings the spiritual and the
It had been in my mind for the past few years to undertake research and
teaching. For this purpose, combined with my desire to find time to meet
schoolchildren, I have shifted to Anna University-my alma mater. What a great
feeling it is to be among young people bubbling with creativity and enthusiasm!
What a great responsibility the elders of this country have at hand to guide this
tremendous energy in a constructive way for nation building! How can we make
up for missed opportunities and the failures of the past?
Spirituality must be integrated with education. Self-realization is the focus. Each
one of us must become aware of our higher self. We are links of a great past to a
grand future. We should ignite our dormant inner energy and let it guide our
lives. The radiance of such minds embarked on constructive endeavour will
bring peace, prosperity and bliss to this nation.

Give Us a Role Model
Men often become what they believe themselves to be. If I believe I cannot do something, it
makes me incapable of doing it. But when I believe I can, then I acquire the ability to do it even
if I didn't have it in the beginning.
Why should I meet young students in particular? Seeking the answer I went back
to my student days. From the island of Rameswaram, what a great journey it's
been! Looking back it all seems quite incredible.
What was it that made it
possible? Hard work? Ambition? Many things come to my mind. I feel the most
important thing was that I always assessed my worth by the value of my
contribution. The fundamental thing is that you must know that you deserve the
good things of life, the benefits that God bestows. Unless our students and young
believe that they are worthy of being citizens of a developed India, how will they
ever be responsible and enlightened citizens?
There is nothing mysterious about the abundance in developed nations. The
historic fact is that the people of these nations-the G8 as they are called-
believed over many generations that they must live a good life in a strong and
prosperous nation. The reality became aligned with their aspirations.
I do not think that abundance and spirituality are mutually exclusive or that it
is wrong to desire material things. For instance, while I personally cherish a life
with minimum of possessions, I admire abundance, for it brings along with it
and confidence, and these eventually help preserve our freedom. Nature
too does not do anything by half measures, as you will see if you look around
you. Go to a garden. In season, there is a profusion of flowers. Or look up. The
universe stretches into infinitude, vast beyond belief.
All that we see in the world is an embodiment of energy. We are a part of the
cosmic energy too, as Sri Aurobindo says. Therefore when we begin to
appreciate that spirit and matter are both part of existence, are in harmony with
each other, we shall realize that it is wrong to feel that it is somehow shameful or
non-spiritual to desire material things.
Yet, this is what we are often led to believe. Certainly there is nothing wrong
with an attitude of making do with the minimum, in leading a life of asceticism.
Mahatma Gandhi led such a life but in his case as in yours it has to be a matter
of choice. You follow such a lifestyle because it answers a need that arises from
deep within you. However, making a virtue of sacrifice
and what is forced upon
you-to celebrate suffering-is a different thing altogether. This was the basis of
my decision to contact our young. To know their dreams and tell them that it is
perfectly all right to dream of a good life, an abundant life, a life full of pleasures
and comforts, and work for that golden era. Whatever you do must come from
the heart, express your spirit, and thereby you will also spread love and joy
My first such meeting took place in a high school in Tripura. It was a
gathering of 500 students and teachers. After my talk on the second vision for
transforming India into a developed nation, there were a series of questions, two
of which I would like to discuss. The first question was: 'Where do we get a role
model from, how do you get a role model?'
Whether we are aware of it or not, from childhood onwards, through various
phases of life, we adopt role models. I said, 'When you are growing up, say till
the age of fifteen, the best role model I can think of would be
mother and your schoolteacher.' They, to my mind, are the people who can
impart the best guidance during this period. I turned to the teachers and parents
present there and told them what a big responsibility they have. I personally
believe the full development of a child with a value system can only come from
these people. In my own home, when I was growing up, I used to see my father
and mother say namaz five times a day, and in spite of their modest financial
resources, I found them always giving to the needy around. My teacher,
Sivasubramania Iyer, was responsible for persuading my father to send me to
school setting aside financial constraints. It is very important for every parent to
be willing to make the effort to guide children to be good human beings-
enlightened and hard-working. The teacher, the child's window to learning and
knowledge, has to play the role model in generating creativity in the child. This
triangle is indeed the real role model I can think of. I would even go to the extent
saying that if parents and teachers show the required dedication to shape the
lives of the young, India would get a new life. As it is said: Behind the parents
stands the school, and behind the teacher the home. Education and the teacher -
student relationship have to be seen not in business terms but with the nation's
growth in mind. A proper education would help nurture a sense of dignity and
self-respect among our youth. These are qualities no law can enforce-they have
to be nurtured ourselves.
The children enjoyed this answer though I don't know whether the parents and
teachers got the message.
Another girl in all seriousness asked, 'Every day we read in the newspaper or
hear our parents talk about atankvadis (terrorists). Who are they? Do they belong
to our country?' This question really shocked me. I myself was searching for an
answer. They are our own people. Sometimes we create them through political
and economic isolation. Or they can be fanatics, sometimes sponsored by hostile
nations, trying to disrupt normal
life through terrorism. I looked at the audience,
at the people sitting by my side, at the teachers, and at the sky for an answer. I
said, 'Children, I am reminded of our epics, the Ramayana and Mahabharata. In
the Ramayana the battle is between the divine hero Rama and demon king
Ravana. It is a long-drawn battle that finally Rama wins. In the Mahabharata,
there is the battle at Kurukshetra. In this fight between good and evil, Dharma
wins again. The battles are many but finally peace triumphs. In our times too we
have seen this battle between good and evil-for instance, the Second World War.
It seems to me that both good and evil will survive side by side. The Almighty
does help them both to various degrees! How to minimize the evil through our
spiritual growth is a question that has persisted throughout human history.'
On another occasion, I addressed a very large gathering of students at St
Mary's School, Dindigul in Tamil Nadu on their seventy-fifth anniversary
celebrations. Among the large number of children wishing to
meet me were two
who were in a hurry to get an answer from me. One student asked, 'I have read
(the Tamil version of
). You always give
a message to dream. Tell me, why dream?'
My answer was to ask the gathered children to recite the following: 'Dream,
dream, dream. Dream transforms into thoughts. Thoughts result in actions.' I told
them, 'Friends, if there are no dreams, there are no revolutionary thoughts; if
there are no thoughts, no actions will emanate. Hence, parents and teachers
should allow their children to dream. Success always follows dreams attempted
though there may be some setbacks and delays.'
Another boy asked, 'Please tell me, who would be the first scientist in the
world?' It occurred to me-science was born and survives only by questions. The
whole foundation of science is questioning. And as parents and teachers well
know, children are the source of unending questions. Hence, 'Child is the first
scientist,' I replied. There
was thunderous applause. The children enjoyed this
different way of thinking. Teachers and parents also smiled at the answer.
During my visit to Assam, I visited Tezpur. I had gone for the convocation
ceremony of Tezpur University and also to receive the honorary doctorate
conferred on me. After the convocation, I took off to meet schoolchildren. It was
a big gathering of young people. The theme of my address was 'Indomitable
Spirit'. As soon as I finished my talk the youngsters mobbed me for autographs.
When I finished giving autographs I faced two interesting questions. One was:
'Why cannot water from the Brahmaputra, which is in flood much of the time,
be diverted to Rajasthan or Tamil Nadu which are starved of water?'
Only children will have these innovative ideas. Grown-ups tend to see more
impossibilities. It was such a powerful question, I was completely beaten. I was
sure even the Prime Minister would not have been able to answer it! How to tell
rivers are a state subject and our states are fighting for the rights to their
waters? That these would bring them prosperity some day but meanwhile they
were flowing wastefully into the sea and causing floods every year. How to
I said, 'India Vision 2020 demands from the young that they start a great
mission of connecting rivers cutting across the states.' I personally feel the
young have the most powerful minds. They can overcome the negativity of the
bureaucracy and some self- centred policies of the state governments to enrich
the people of the country. They can even improve coordination between the
states and the Centre. And they surely will!
Another student asked me a question for which again I had no ready answer.
He said, 'Sir, big leaders in any field don't come and talk to us. We see our
Prime Minister often going to Chennai, Lucknow, and many places. But he never
comes here. We want him; we want to talk to him.' I was impressed by this urge
to communicate with the country's leaders. I said, when I reach Delhi,
your dream to the leaders and your dream will come true.
I later narrated this to the Prime Minister. He conceded the point and said,
'Children don't talk to me any more. Maybe the security cordon has created a
separation.' I request our leaders in different fields to interact more with the
children of the country for a better understanding of their own purpose in life as
also for helping create a better future for our children.
I have visited Jharkhand a number of times after its formation. Every time I
visit it, I am struck by the tremendous resources that wait to be harnessed in the
state, which will multiply its wealth manifold. At the Sri Ramakrishna High
School, Bokaro, I addressed a gathering of about 3,000 students and saw their
creativity on display in an exhibition of their paintings, toys and other items
made by them. In my conversation with them, one student asked me, 'In
Jharkhand, it is green everywhere. We have forests, streams and hills. Why is it
that we have a desert in Rajasthan?'
The question reminded me of a similar one in Assam: Why cannot the
Brahmaputra's waters be taken to Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan? 'You know,
twenty years ago, you would not have seen much cultivation in Rajasthan. But
once the Indira Gandhi Canal was constructed agriculture became possible in
many places. It is possible for man to transform the desert into a fertile land.' I
repeated what I had told the student in Assam. 'It has to be one of the greatest
missions of India to connect rivers so that water can reach many water-starved
states. Visionary action is needed. When you grow up you will probably be part
of reconstructing this nation and giving shape to these thoughts.'
One child came to me with a serious expression and asked, 'Sir, will your
Agni missile cross the ocean and reach America?'
I was a little startled by this thought. 'For us no country is our enemy to send
Agni there. Particularly America is our friend. Agni symbolizes our strength. It
shows that India has all the capabilities.'
During my visit to Cuttack I participated in the birthday celebrations of the
late Justice Harihar Mahapatra. I went there at the invitation of Justice
Ranganath Mishra. For me, it was a revelation, how the independence
movement, the first vision for the nation, had created the larger-than-life figure
of Justice Harihar Mahapatra. He lived to the age of ninety-two and established
Cuttack Eye Hospital, Utkal University and above all organized multi-pronged
efforts to remove poverty. My biography in Oriya was released. At the end of my
speech the youngsters crowding around put forth many questions.
The first question was, 'Sir, tell us which are your favourite books, that you
loved and which have shaped your mind?'
I said, 'Four books in my life have been very close to my heart. I cherish
reading them. The first is
by Dr Alexis Carrel, a doctor-
turned-philosopher and a Nobel laureate. This book highlights how the mind and
body both have to be treated in an ailment as the two are
treat one and ignore the other. In particular, children who dream of becoming
doctors should read the book. They will learn that the human body is not a
mechanical system; it is a very intelligent organism with a most intricate and
sensitive feedback system. The second book, one I venerate, is Tiruvalluvar's
which provides an excellent code of life. The third is
by Lillian Eichler Watson which has touched me deeply. It
illuminates how we live and has been an invaluable guide to me for fifty years.
And the Holy Quran is, of course, a constant companion.'
While I was addressing another gathering of schoolchildren in Anand,
Gujarat, one smart boy asked a very intelligent question: 'Who is our enemy?' I
liked the question and put it to the other students, encouraging them to come
forward with their views. Then came the answer, 'Poverty.' What a wise reaction
from this young child whom I have mentioned in the dedication.
The last question, which I am including
here, came from the powerful mind of
another child. 'Tell me, sir, are Pakistani weapons stronger than Indian ones?' I
asked the child why this doubt arose in his mind. Reports he read in the media
led him to think so, he said.
'This is a unique characteristic of our country-to belittle our capabilities. It
may even be genetic!' I said. 'India can design, develop and produce any type of
missile and any type of nuclear weapon. This is a capability only four countries
in the world have. You remove all the doubts from your mind,' I told the child,
who gave me a very satisfied look.
I have selected only eleven questions here from among the hundreds of
questions I have been asked during the course of meeting 40,000 high school
students so far. The questions reflect the children's innocence, but most of all
they show how strongly they feel the desire to live in a strong and prosperous
nation. I also realized from these sessions how important it is for them to have
role models, whether in
science, industry, sports, entertainment or some other
field. The question is: Can we give our children a role model? And how?
At the dawn of the new millennium came the news that the human genome
had been decoded. All the 30,000 genes that human beings carry today, we are
told, are identical to those of our Stone Age ancestors who lived thousands of
years ago. One of the traits that has come down to us from them, along with
others that are needed for survival, is the desire for achievement.
It is said that nature gave us this instinct because the need to achieve, like the
need to reproduce, the need to eat, the need to drink and the need to breathe, is
simply too important to be left to chance. History shows the hunger for
achievement is a highly evolved one and undoubtedly the strongest one. We tend
to forget it but it underlines much of our experience. Most important, without it,
how would we learn and grow, aspire to greater perfection?
I have seen Dr Vikram Sarabhai's vision succeeding over three decades
sustained and coordinated achievement. At work in that and any other
endeavour was this same desire to exceed the limits. As we try and excel, role
models play a guiding role. The power of Vikram Sarabhai was such that others
took up his vision and completed it long after he was no more. For you it could
be someone else whom you admire-a sportsperson, a teacher, a successful
I recently had the chance to meet a legendary personality, a role model herself.
Lata Mangeshkar was presiding over a function in remembrance of her father,
Master Deenanath Mangeshkar. Lata Mangeshkar is a recipient of the Bharat
Ratna and I felt honoured that she had asked me to inaugurate the 450-bed
Deenanath Hospital and Research Centre in Pune. I visited the hospital just
before the inauguration. I found that it would be treating nearly 30 per cent of
the patients free. I was touched by the fact that despite her wealth and fame, she
had not lost sight of the fact that one needs to do all one can
to help relieve the
Her songs played over the radio have brought pleasure to countless hearts over
the decades. During the India - China conflict in 1962, her song 'Ae mere vatan
ke logo' moved an entire nation. Few people can claim to have influenced the
lives of millions in such a delightful way.
Role models can help us focus on what is correct for us as individuals, as
groups and, of course, as a nation. They can also lead us to great success. We
seem to have got carried away with the success of a few in the field of
information technology. But that is indeed nothing compared to what we can and
should achieve. Ancient India was a knowledge society and a leader in many
intellectual pursuits, particularly in the fields of mathematics, medicine and
astronomy. A renaissance is imperative for us to once again become a knowledge
superpower rather than simply providing cheap labour in areas of high
A nation's wealth is the young generation of the country. When they grow up,
who can be the role models? Mother, father and elementary schoolteachers play
a very important part as role models. When the child grows up, the role models
will be national leaders of quality and integrity in every field including politics,
the sciences, technology and industry.

Visionary Teachers and Scientists
Whatever you can do or dream you can, begin it. Boldness has genius, power and magic in it.
The great minds of the country had the ability to make others join their
endeavour to convert dreams into reality. For them, the nation was bigger than
themselves and they could draw thousands to act upon their dreams.
In December 2000, I had participated in the birth centenary celebrations of
Adhyapaka Rathna T. Totadri Iyengar. I graduated in science from St Joseph's
College, Tiruchirapalli (1954). As a young student I saw Prof. T. Totadri
Iyengar-a unique, divine-looking personality-walking through the college
campus every morning and teaching mathematics to the students of B.Sc.
(Honours) and M.Sc. The students looked at him with awe as one would at a
guru, which indeed he was. When he walked, knowledge radiated all around. At
that time, 'Calculus' Srinivasan was my mathematics teacher. He used to talk
about Prof. Totadri Iyengar with deep respect and would organize integrated
classes for first year B.Sc. (Honours) and first year B.Sc. (Physics) to be taught
by him. I also had the opportunity to attend some of these classes, particularly on
the subjects of modern algebra and statistics. When we were in first year B.Sc.,
'Calculus' Srinivasan used to pick the top ten students as members of the
Mathematics Club of St Joseph's where Prof. Totadri Iyengar used to give a
One day, in 1952, he gave a lecture on ancient mathematicians and
astronomers of India. He spoke for nearly one hour. The lecture still rings in my
ears. Let me share with you my thoughts about some ancient mathematicians,
glimpses of whom I saw in Prof. Totadri Iyengar in my own way.
476 in Kusumapura (now called Patna), was an
astronomer and mathematician. He was reputed to be a repository of all the
mathematical knowledge known at that point of time. He was only twenty-three
years old when he wrote
in two parts. The text covers arithmetic,
algebra and trigonometry and, of course, astronomy. He gave formulae for the
areas of a triangle and a circle and attempted to give the volumes of a sphere and
a pyramid. He was the first to give an approximation to pi as the ratio of a
circle's circumference and diameter, arriving at the value of 3.1416. To celebrate
this great astronomer, India named its first satellite launched in 1975 Aryabhata.
Brahmagupta was born in
Billamala in Rajasthan in the empire of
Harsha. He wrote the
at the age of thirty. He updated
works of astronomy. He covered progressions and geometry. He also studied and
gave what is known as the solution of indeterminate equations of different
degrees as well as solutions to quadratic equations.
Bhaskaracharya was another unique intellectual of his time. He was born in
1114 at Vijjalbada, located at what is now the border of Karnataka and
Maharashtra. He wrote the famous
in four chapters. He
dealt with astronomy and algebra and is known to be the first recognized
mathematician who evolved value to zero from the concept based on
Aryabhata's discovery. To honour him, ISRO's second series of satellites was
named Bhaskara I and II (1979 and 1981).
The work of these three mathematicians of India provides the context of
Albert Einstein's remark that 'We owe a lot to the Indians who taught us how to
count, without which no worthwhile scientific discovery
could have been made.'
Then comes to my mind the greatest of all geniuses ever known and
acknowledged, and who lived within our present memory- Srinivasa
Ramanujan. He lived only for thirty- three years (1887 - 1920) and had no
practical formal education or means of living. Yet, his inexhaustible spirit and
love for his subject enabled him to make a vast contribution to mathematical
research and some of his contributions are still under serious study, engaging the
efforts of mathematicians to establish formal proofs. Ramanujan was a unique
Indian genius who could melt the heart of as rigorous a mathematician as Prof.
G.H. Hardy of Trinity College, Cambridge. In fact, it is not an exaggeration to
say that it was Hardy who discovered Ramanujan for the world. Why do not our
reputed scientists locate another Ramanujan in our schools? Oh my friends why
don't you in every field integrate and grow instead of differentiating!
'Every integer is a personal friend of Ramanujan,' one of the tributes to
Ramanujan said and it was no exaggeration. Prof. Hardy, while rating geniuses
on a scale of 100, put most of them in the range of around 30, giving a rating of
60 to the rare exception. However, for Ramanujan, he suggested, only the value
of 100 would fit. There can be no better tribute to either Ramanujan or to the
Indian heritage. Ramanujan's work covers vast areas including prime numbers,
hyper geometric series, modular functions, elliptic functions, mock theta
functions, even magic squares, apart from some serious work on the geometry of
ellipses, squaring the circle and so on.
I hope that eminent teachers who teach and inspire the young students of
mathematics will continue their unmatched and noble services in the years to
come, thus ensuring the march of Indian brilliance in this field. Prof. S.
Chandrasekhar, the astrophysicist, continued the Indian mathematics tradition in
his work abroad. Of course mathematics is universal. Now the tradition will
further blossom with the efforts of Prof. C.S. Seshadri, Prof. J.V. Narlikar,
M.S. Narasimhan, Prof. S.R.S. Varadhan, Prof. M.S. Raghunathan, Prof.
Narender Karmakar and Prof. Ashok Sen, among others.
Sir C.V. Raman started his career in the Office of the Accountant General,
Calcutta. But the scientist in him would not let him rest and he was always
probing for answers to some of the problems that interested him. Fortunately, he
was supported by the great educationist Ashutosh Mukherjee, who encouraged
Sir C.V. Raman to pursue his research. It is noteworthy that the Raman Effect,
the discovery of which brought him the Nobel Prize, did not come out of a grand
establishment set up at vast expense. I believe the urge to show to the world the
excellence of Indian minds would have been a major motivating factor for Sir
C.V. Raman. The same is the case with Prof. S. Chandrasekhar, also a Nobel
laureate for his work on black holes. There are some interesting statements in his
by Kameshwar C. Wali. As it points out, 'Chandra grew up
in what was a golden
age for science, art and literature in India, spurred on partly
by the struggle for independence. J.C. Bose, C.V. Raman, Meghnad Saha,
Srinivasa Ramanujan, and Rabindranath Tagore, by their achievements in
scientific and creative endeavours, became national heroes along with Jawaharlal
Nehru, Mahatma Gandhi, and a host of others ' Possibly, their great success
helped produce an atmosphere of creativity. Howsoever it may be, it is worth
noting, as Chandrasekhar observed, 'that in the modern era before 1910, there
were no (Indian) scientists of international reputation or standing. Between 1920
and 1925, we had suddenly five or six internationally well-known men. I myself
have associated this remarkable phenomenon with the need for self-expression,
which became a dominant motive among the young during the national
movement. It was a part of the national movement to assert oneself. India was a
subject country, but particularly in science, we could show the West in their
own realm that we were equal to them'.
Here I would like to quote Sir C.V.
Raman, who said in 1969 while addressing
young graduates, 'I would like to tell the young men and women before me not
to lose hope and courage. Success can only come to you by courageous devotion
to the task lying in front of you. I can assert without fear of contradiction that the
quality of the Indian mind is equal to the quality of any Teutonic, Nordic or
Anglo-Saxon mind. What we lack is perhaps courage, what we lack is perhaps
driving force, which takes one anywhere. We have, I think, developed an
inferiority complex. I think what is needed in India today is the destruction of
that defeatist spirit. We need a spirit of victory, a spirit that will carry us to our
rightful place under the sun, a spirit which can recognize that we, as inheritors of
a proud civilization, are entitled to our rightful place on this planet. If that
indomitable spirit were to arise nothing can hold us from achieving our rightful
Further afield, there was similarly the emergence of others who were great in
their respective fields. Interestingly, a music trinity
of great saints, Thiagaraja
Swamigal, Muthuswamy Deekshidar and Shyama Sastrigal, also emerged at the
same time in south India within a 50-km radius. What we should note is that the
movement for independence generated the best of leaders in arts, science,
technology, economics, history and literature who stand with the best in the
In more recent times too we have seen the emergence of great visionary
scientists. Particularly, I was interested in the lives of three scientists-Dr D.S.
Kothari, Dr Homi J. Bhabha and Dr Vikram Sarabhai. I wanted to learn more
about their leadership qualities in the scientific and technological fields which
helped link these to the development of the nation. They are the founders of
three great institutions-DRDO, DAE, ISRO.
Dr D.S. Kothari, a professor at Delhi University, was an outstanding physicist
and astrophysicist. He is well known for ionization of matter by pressure in cold
compact objects like planets. This theory is complementary to the epoch-making
ionization of his guru, Dr Meghnad Saha. Dr D.S. Kothari set a
scientific tradition in Indian defence tasks when he became Scientific Adviser to
Defence Minister in 1948. The first thing he did was to establish the Defence
Science Centre to do research in electronic materials, nuclear medicine and
ballistic science. He is considered the architect of defence science in India. We
are celebrating this great mind through a research chair at the Indian Institute of
Dr Bhabha did research in theoretical physics at Cambridge University. From
1930 to 1939, Homi Bhabha carried out research relating to cosmic radiation. In
1939, he joined Sir C.V. Raman at IISc, Bangalore. Later, he founded the Tata
Institute of Fundamental Research with focus on nuclear and mathematical
sciences. He established the Atomic Energy Commission in 1948. His vision led
to the setting up of numerous centres in the field of nuclear science and
technology, such as those for producing nuclear power, or for research in nuclear
medicine. These science institutions generated further technological centres
keeping nuclear science as the vital component.
Dr Sarabhai, the youngest of the three, had worked with Sir C.V. Raman in
experimental cosmic rays. He established the Physical Research Laboratory at
Ahmedabad with space research as the focus. In 1963, Thumba Equatorial
Rocket Launching Station (TERLS) began launching sounding rockets for
atmospheric research. Dr Sarabhai established the Space Science & Technology
Centre (SSTC) and was its director. His vision led to the establishment of ISRO
with its allied centres responsible for development of launch vehicles, satellites,
mission management and applications.
These three Indian scientists, all of them physicists, started physics research
institutions that blossomed into defence technology, nuclear technology and
space technology, which now employ 20,000 scientists in centres spread around
the country. One thing I noted was that all three realized the
making the political leadership understand what science could do for the country.
It is essential that technologies that give immediate benefits to the people be
taken up for implementation by the system regardless of which party is in power.
Another important message conveyed by these scientists is that basic science is
vital for growth of technology and for developing new leaders in science. Let us
learn from them the proven qualities of leadership to value science and
technology in an integrated way.
In 1962, Dr Sarabhai and Dr Bhabha were looking for a site to establish the
space research station in the equatorial region. Thumba in Kerala was found
most suitable as it was near the equatorial region and was ideally suited for
ionospheric research. The locality, however, was inhabited by thousands of
fishermen living in the villages there. It also had a beautiful church called St
Mary Magdalene Church and the Bishop's house. As such, the acquisition of the
land did not move any further.
Dr Sarabhai met the Bishop, His Excellency Rev. Dr Peter Bernard Pereira, on
a Saturday and requested transfer of the property. The Bishop smiled and asked
him to meet him the next day. In the Sunday morning service, the Bishop told
the congregation, 'My children, I have a famous scientist with me who wants our
church and the place I live for the work of space science and research. Science
seeks truth that enriches human life. The higher level of religion is spirituality.
The spiritual preachers seek the help of the Almighty to bring peace to human
minds. In short, what Vikram is doing and what I am doing are the same- both
science and spirituality seek the Almighty's blessings for human prosperity in
mind and body. Children, can we give them God's abode for a scientific
mission?' There was silence for a while followed by a hearty 'Amen' from the
congregation which made the whole church reverberate.
It was indeed a great experience working with Dr Sarabhai from 1963 to 1971.
As a young engineer engaged in the tasks of
systems and rocket engineering systems at the Thiruvananthapuram space centre
I drew tremendous energy from his leadership. Though the nation was in its
technological infancy, Dr Sarabhai was dreaming of developing our own satellite
launch vehicles. These would be used to launch from Indian soil remote sensing
satellites in sun- synchronous orbit and communication satellites in
geosynchronous orbit. Today, his vision is almost realized with the launch of the
Geosynchronous Launch Vehicle (GSLV). ISRO has also operationalized the
IRS and INSAT systems, thereby bringing the benefits of space to the common
There is an experience I would like to share with you in relation to Dr
Sarabhai's vision for space programmes. I wrote briefly in
this episode. The design project of India's first satellite launch vehicle (SLV-3)
was taken up at the Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC). The design of each
stage of rocket, heat shield and guidance system was given to selected project
leaders. I was given the design project of the fourth stage of SLV-3, that is, the
upper stage rocket, which would give the final velocity to put Rohini into orbit.
This fourth stage uses an advanced composite material that provides high
strength with minimum weight. It also has maximum loading of high energy
solid propellant. While we were developing the design of this upper stage in
1970, I received a call from Dr Sarabhai from Ahmedabad stating that he would
be visiting Thiruvananthapuram along with Prof. Hubert Curien, chairman of
CNES, the French space agency. I was asked to give a presentation about the
fourth stage to Prof. Curien's team. When the presentation was over, we realized
that the SLV-3 fourth stage was also being considered as upper stage for the
French Diamont P-4 launch vehicle. The CNES needed an apogee rocket motor
nearly double the propellant weight and also size of the stage that we had
A decision was then taken in the same meeting that the fourth stage should be
reconfigured to match and suit both Diamont
P-4 and SLV-3. I mention this
episode because at the time this decision was taken, we ourselves were in the
design stage! Such was Dr Sarabhai's confidence in the Indian scientific
community. Development work on this stage started ahead of the other stages of
SLV-3. With our motivation thus boosted, work proceeded in full swing. A series
of reviews took place between the two teams and the fourth stage graduated
from drawing board to developing stage. Unfortunately in 1971, Dr Sarabhai
passed away, and at the same time the French government called off the Diamont
Once the fourth stage was developed and a series of tests was going on, a new
requirement appeared on the horizon, in the form of India building a small
communication satellite to be launched by the European Ariane launch vehicle.
For the APPLE-Ariane Passenger Payload Experiment-communication satellite,
the SLV-3 fourth stage proved a perfect fit and it was included in the payload of
the Ariane launch in 1981 from Kourou, French Guiana.
The vision seeded in
1970 by Dr Vikram Sarabhai was indeed realized when APPLE was placed in
geostationary orbit and started communicating with our earth stations. APPLE's
success proved that a vision with committed scientific support will achieve its
aim. This achievement came as a fantastic fillip to the rocket technologists in the
country. The visionary may not be with us today but his vision gets realized.
The dream of Dr Sarabhai was shaped into reality by Prof. Satish Dhawan.
After he took charge of ISRO from 1972, Prof. Dhawan structured and nurtured
ISRO with a space profile and his work led to many significant accomplishments
and benefits from a number of remote sensing and communication satellites. The
Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle accomplished the feat of launching multiple
satellites for India and other countries, injecting them in different orbits in a
I learned an important lesson in management from Prof. Dhawan when I was
appointed Project Director SLV-3 in 1972 to
design, develop and launch the first
satellite launch vehicle to inject Rohini into near earth orbit. This was that when
a Project Director is appointed, the whole organization-including the Chairman
ISRO-works for his success. It is a lesson that has been of abiding value all
through the other projects I have worked on. The other thing I have learnt after
more than forty years of working in three departments in various projects and
programmes is that you will succeed as a project leader as long as you remember
that the project is bigger than you. Wherever the project leader tries to make
himself out to be bigger than the project, the enterprise suffers.
I recall my working at ISRO Headquarters, Bangalore, as Director, Launch
Vehicle Programmes/Systems, in the early 1980s, when we were debating the
performance and cost-effectiveness of launch vehicles. In 1981, the scientists of
VSSC, Thiruvananthapuram, with the help of other ISRO centres, evolved a
configuration of the PSLV core vehicle with two large strap-on
PSLV weighed about 400 tonnes at take-off. Prof. Dhawan wanted to study an
alternative and simple configuration. I and some of my colleagues, A. Sivathanu
Pillai, N. Sundararajan and K. Padmanabha Menon, carried out mission,
technology and feasibility studies for the optimal configuration. The team
designed several options, including a unique core vehicle with an advanced solid
propellant booster, using first stage rockets of SLV-3 as strap- ons. This brought
the PSLV weight down to only about 275 tonnes at take-off. Prof. Dhawan used
to come almost daily to my small room, which was close to his office, and
debate the possible configuration choice. He was himself a foremost
aerodynamic specialist with mathematics and system engineering background,
and would illustrate his ideas on the blackboard and ask us to do more
homework. We also studied the growth opportunities of PSLV with cryogenic
upper stage as a GSLV and the possibility of launching due-east geosynchronous
missions. Prof. Dhawan put the two most favoured
discussion among the experts and the ISRO teams. Detailed examination and
debate, taking the long- term plans into account, took place and they chose the
PSLV configuration as proposed by my launch vehicle team. Prof. Dhawan
considered the future scenario of operationalization of PSLV and GSLV, bearing
in mind the satellites and application programmes, and decided on this unique
configuration and evolved the roadmap for ISRO for the next fifteen years. I and
Prof. Narasimha brought out a book,
Development in Fluid Mechanics and
, with Prof. Dhawan's handwritten fifteen-year space profile,
based on the chosen PSLV configuration.
A memorable day for me is 31 May 1982. Prof. Dhawan gave me a send-off in
an unconventional way. He called an ISRO council meeting to discuss the future
launch vehicle programme. I made a presentation to the directors of the ISRO
centres on performance and cost-effectiveness of our launch vehicles and the
the presentation, Prof. Dhawan broke the news that he had
given me to DRDO. This decision indeed gave me a change that led to progress
in a different field.
We see today self-reliance in launch vehicle technology with PSLV
operational and GSLV getting ready to be operationalized. This is close to the
direction envisaged in the early 1980s by Prof. Dhawan. The recognition of
ISRO as a successful organization was due to the strong foundation and space
profile envisioned by him. One test of leadership is also how well successors are
able to carry forward a programme. At ISRO, Prof. U.R. Rao and Dr K.
Kasturirangan brought further success and glory to the organization. After his
retirement Prof. Dhawan continued as a member of the Space Commission and
in that capacity continued to help the organization which he built. Remarkably,
Prof. Dhawan saw the space missions envisioned by him come into being in his
lifetime. He also saw in his lifetime many of those he had tutored emerge as
technology leaders themselves who have contributed immeasurably to the
country. What a great personality he was!
After joining the DRDO, I started the missile development programme there.
During the Integrated Guided Missile Development Programme (IGMDP), the
focus was to design missiles with state-of-theart performance at the time of
deployment. The surface-to-surface missile Prithvi became the best in its class
and users' delight with its high accuracy, reliable performance and the
manoeuvrable trajectories. The first stage of SLV-3 became handy to configure
Agni as a long-range deterrent. It blossomed from the REX (Re-Entry
eXperiment) programme conceived by my team in 1981. Both Prithvi and Agni
are in production and induction phase. Trishul, which is a surface-to-air missile,
and Akash, once development is complete, will be contemporary missiles. The
third generation anti-tank Nag will dominate as one of the best such missiles. In
any aerospace or missile development programme, delays are possible owing to
technical complexity of the work. But this should not deter us. The
propaganda of foreign sellers and their associates in India should not dictate
India's procurement decisions. My experience in dealing with the network of
institutions that has been established is that our country has tremendous potential
to develop the best technologies in this field. India could combat the MTCR very
effectively, thereby proving to those who wanted us to fail that 'we can do it'.
Once we had developed competence in the design of missile systems I looked
beyond the IGMDP. The natural course of action appeared to be the supersonic
cruise missile, which is essential in tactical warfare. Many countries have cruise
missiles, but they fly at subsonic speed. Our association with one of the Russian
institutes, NPO Mashinostroyenia, developed into a partnership in the joint
design and development of supersonic cruise missile system. This partnership is
based upon friendship and equal competencies.
I recall my association with Dr H.A. Yefremov, Director General of NPO
Mashinostroyenia, an outstanding scientist of our time, who had developed
seven types of cruise missiles and inducted the systems in the Russian Navy.
Creating a joint venture between India and Russia in high-technology projects in
the prevailing situation in the 1990s became a complex question and a challenge
to both Dr Yefremov and me. Whenever I met Dr Yefremov, I got the feeling of
meeting a great scientist like Prof. Satish Dhawan or Dr Werner Von Braun, the
father of rocketry. Dr Yefremov took me to his technology centres which are not
normally shown to any foreigner. He truly treated me as a friend and arranged an
Indian lunch in his laboratory. I took him to the Research Centre Imarat, an
advanced missile technology centre at Hyderabad. He was genuinely pleased to
see the strides we had made. Our scientific minds merged and our friendship
blossomed. We christened the joint venture as BrahMos, a combination of the
names of two rivers, the Brahmaputra
and the Moscow. Sivathanu Pillai,
Ramanathan, Venugopalan and Vice-Admiral Bharat Bhushan, along with the
Russian specialists, gave shape to the joint venture. Sivathanu Pillai was the
natural choice as the Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director of the joint
venture, concurrently holding charge in DRDO as Chief Controller R&D for
missiles. The dual role, an exceptional decision of the government, was essential
to ensure the success of this venture. Venugopalan, an outstanding propulsion
scientist from the Defence Research & Development Laboratory (DRDL),
became the Project Director. A new kind of joint venture came into existence,
one which bridged the scientific community and industry of the two countries in
design, development, production and marketing of an advanced technology
weapon. It was a source of great joy for me, as it was for the two teams. The first
flight of BrahMos on 12 June 2001 from the Interim Test Range, Chandipur, was
a milestone signalling the progress of the joint venture. The second
April 2002, confirmed the results of the first and came as a great encouragement
Dr Yefremov and I are glad that both India and Russia have realized that this
joint venture is the right way to bridge two friendly nations for building high-
technology weapon systems that could enter the world market My dream of
marketing an advanced weapon system ahead of the so-called developed
countries will come true through BrahMos, even though I am away from the
scene. The team that I built has performed creditably. I am happy.
I read a book titled
by the milkman of India, Dr
Verghese Kurien. He says in the book, 'It was by chance that I became a dairy
man.' But a British expert's criticism, 'The sewer water of London is
bacteriologically superior to the milk of Bombay,' served as a challenge to the
young Kurien, who has taken dairying from strength to strength over the decades
so that today India is a front-ranker in milk production.
On a visit to Anand I had the opportunity
to spend a day with him. As I went
around the Amul establishment, I saw value addition at work. From milk the
cooperative has branched off to making numerous derivatives, including butter,
cheese and ice- cream. These initiatives have given it the strength to be a major
player in a highly competitive market. When I asked him what, in his view, was
one sure way of launching the country on a growth trajectory, his answer was:
'You must build on the resources represented by our young professionals and by
our nation's farmers. Without their involvement we cannot succeed. With their
involvement we cannot fail.'
While talking about scientists, I recall my meeting with a medical specialist,
Prof. Kakarla Subba Rao, at the Indo-American Cancer Institute at Hyderabad. I
asked him if cancer was some unmitigated curse. Yes and no, said the seventy-
seven-year-old Albert Einstein Professor of Radiology. Yes, because we
genetically inherit certain traits which make us vulnerable to cancer. No, because
whether we get it or escape it depends largely
on our immune response.
Research into how the brain can influence immune response has given rise to the
new field called Psycho-Neuro-Immunology (PNI). Findings in this field have
brought great hope to people dealing with such difficult illnesses as cancer,
AIDS, CFIDS (Chronic Fatigue Immune Dysfunction Syndrome) and other
immune-system-related diseases. Other fields of research include Psycho-Neuro-
Cardiology (PNC), the study of the mind - heart connection, or Psycho-Neuro-
Haematology (PNH), the study of how the mind can influence blood-related
disorders, such as clotting problems in haemophilia. Such is the power of
These are diseases which normally require intensive treatment. But even here,
medicine acknowledges that our minds can play a major role.
Vision ignites the minds. India needs visionaries of the stature of J.R.D. Tata,
Vikram Sarabhai, Satish Dhawan and Dr Verghese Kurien, to name a few, who
can involve an entire generation in mission-driven programmes which benefit
the country as a whole.

Learning From Saints and Seers
For the society to prosper there are two important needs. They are: prosperity through wealth
generation and cherishing the value system of the people. The combination of the two will make
the Nation truly strong and prosperous.
I always tell the young to dream. This message comes from the understanding
that each one of us has within ourselves the ability to create the circumstances
success-to attract, so to say, to ourselves what we desire. When as a child
Einstein first saw a compass he was fascinated by the way the needle moved
whenever he changed direction. Watching the needle became an obsession with
him as he tried to understand the invisible force that moved the compass needle.
Where was the force located? Who controlled it? Why did it always work? What
was it made of? Were there places where it didn't operate? It is of course the
magnetic energy of the earth that keeps pulling the compass needle, a tiny
magnet, along the north - south axis of the earth's magnetic field. But is that all
there is to it?
We can easily see the magnetic field at work, but cannot detect it with our
senses, even though it is everywhere on our planet. Logically then, it is in us
Similarly, our planet is in a perpetual state of motion as it goes spinning
through space. Everything on the planet is a part of this movement, even though
it appears to us that we are motionless. I am on the planet and thus part of the
energy that moves it.
The energy that is the very essence of the planet is in me.
Dyer argues that we can use this universal energy to bring to us the objects of
our desire, because what we desire is also in us and vice versa. It becomes a
matter of alignment and will that allows us to tap into this force.
With thoughts like these on the points where science and spiritualism
converge, I carved out opportunities to visit a few unique places in a year's time.
Most of these places were new to me and offered me the chance to learn more
about certain things I had always been interested in but could not explore-such
as the world of saints and seers. I saw a diverse range of activities being carried
out in the spiritual centres I visited. At one, it was the value-based education
being provided that impressed me. At another place, an attempt was being made
to integrate ancient science with modern and Sanskrit documents were being
studied to gauge the progress made in earlier times. I saw how a Sufi saint could
magnet for people of different faiths. I had an extended discussion on
the fusion of science and spirituality with a guru. I saw how a punya atma can go
beyond providing religious strength to setting up hospitals and universities, as
also a scheme for supply of water. There was one place which seeks to alleviate
the distress of patients who are suffering from terminal cancer. Another centre
was exploring the link between medical science and meditation.
My journey started on 13 June 2001, when I met Pramukh Swami Maharaj of
Swaminarayan Sanstha at Ahmedabad. My discussion with Swamiji on the
fusion of science and spirituality, and the role it could play in national
development, went on for an hour. I am tempted to reproduce verbatim the
questions and answers with Swamiji.
Abdul Kalam (AK): Swamiji, India had the vision, since 1857, to be an
independent nation. It took ninety years for us as a nation to get freedom. During
this time the whole nation-the young and old, rich and poor, educated and
illiterate-was together in this
aim. The goal was one, focussed, and well
understood-to acquire independence. Swamiji, what is or what can be such a
vision now? Since the last fifty years, India has been a developing country. It
means economically it is not strong, socially it is not stable, in security aspects it
is not self- reliant, and that is why it is called a developing country. Five hundred
members of TIFAC (Technology Information, Forecasting and Assessment
Council) have given thought to what should be the next vision for India. How do
we transform a developing country into a developed country in the next twenty
years? We have identified five important areas to transform India- education and
healthcare, agriculture, information and communication, infrastructure and
critical technology. Swamiji, our problem is that we may present this before the
government, but how do we create people with values to carry out such a big
vision? What we need is a cadre of value- based citizens. Otherwise resources
will not be deployed effectively, as we are witnessing. For this, we need your
Swamiji: Along with these five, you needed a sixth one-faith in God and
developing people through spirituality. This is very important. We need to first
generate a moral and spiritual atmosphere. There has to be a change in today's
climate of crime and corruption. We need people who live by the laws of the
scriptures and bear faith in God. For this we need to rekindle belief. This will
make things easier. Our problems will be solved and we shall be able to achieve
AK: Swamiji, for carrying forward such a big vision of transforming India,
should we first create a spiritual tradition-make people more spiritually
inclined-and then embark upon our vision, or focus on one of the important
areas like education or health? Or should we integrate everything and begin
Swamiji: We must move ahead simultaneously. Work in the five fields that your
team has identified for the country's progress should be continued and this
should be concurrently incorporated. Our culture
teaches us to learn both Para
(spiritual) and Apara (worldly) vidya (knowledge). Therefore, together with
knowledge of the Apara, one should learn the Para as well. If one learns this then
Apara vidya- worldly knowledge-will become founded on dharma and
spirituality. One must remember that in God's scheme of things, the whole
purpose behind creation is the idea that every person-every soul-attains bliss.
AK: To realize this great dream, three types of people are needed-punya atma
(virtuous people), punya neta (virtuous leaders) and punya adhikari (virtuous
officers). If the population of all the three were to increase in our society, then
India would become the jagadguru (world leader). How can their numbers be
Swamiji: Together with your academic and scientific training, give spiritual
training in our schools and colleges. Nowadays, spiritual education has been
removed from the syllabi of schools and colleges. That which should be taught
from infancy is being neglected and we continue to provide only academic
knowledge. But from the beginning, right from birth, people should be taught
values, only then will people become virtuous. Knowledge of our scriptures and
great sadhus and sages should be included in the syllabus. The social, spiritual
and political leaders whom we hold in respect imbibed the correct values from
the very beginning. In the past, such values were taught in our gurukul system of
education. Whether a prince or a pauper, everyone studied together. Along with
academics, lessons such as satyam vada (speak the truth), dharmam chara (tread
the path of righteousness), service towards others and faith in God were taught.
AK: Swamiji, good citizens cannot be produced by the laws of the government.
Can spiritual institutions do it? Can you ask parents to guide their children to
learn the right values up to the age of fifteen? Similarly, in all elementary
schools, teachers should also instil these in the students. But if we fail to do this,
then the government cannot by itself produce good, honest citizens. Is my
Swamiji: Yes, it's true. It's definitely true. We've been saying from the very
beginning that values should be taught by parents at home, teachers at school,
and the guru in later life.
AK: Swamiji, when I first launched a rocket it failed, but strengthened by
ISRO's support, my team combated the failure to achieve success. This
sentiment is also expressed by Tiruvalluvar in the
occurs, challenge it with cheerful attitude.
Swamiji: When one possesses such noble thoughts, patriotism is but natural.
That's why we say, if spiritual knowledge is given from the beginning, love and
pride for one's country, society and dharma is a natural result. However, spiritual
values should form the foundation of life.
AK: Spiritual strength is important. And along with this, we must have economic
strength for strength is respected in the world. A combination of both is
necessary. And to achieve both, there is only one answer-sweat! Hard work is a
Swamiji: We often say, 'Human effort and God's grace.' Even failure of the first
rocket, which you faced, was for your good, it prodded you to make things
better. God has ultimately given you success.
AK: For India's development, I wish to establish a trust-Vision 2020-with five
like- minded individuals. I seek your blessings for this.
Swamiji: God's blessings are already upon you. I shall pray that your ideas are
successfully realized. May India prosper both spiritually and economically. What
I wish to say is that the stronger the spiritual wealth, the stronger will become all
other forms of wealth. If you increase material wealth alone, man will be lost in
luxury and worldly pleasures. Spirituality will guide him back, help him rise
above mundane pleasures. In reality, we rarely provide what is really needed. We
provide everything else, clothing, food, shelter, but with all this we should also
provide spiritual wealth. One should remember that when man gains extra
money and power, more than what is necessary,
then he invites ruin, restlessness
and destruction. He loses control.
It's good that you've come here today. It's given us much joy. The rishis (sages)
of the past have also given us science. You, too, are a rishi.
In September 2001, I visited the Dargah Sharif of Sufi mystic Khwaja
Moinuddin Chishti, better known as Gharib Nawaz, at Ajmer. Here, in
at the age of 114, the saint entered his cell to pray in seclusion for six days, at the
end of which he passed away. As I went round the dargah, I was struck by the
beauty of all that the shrine symbolized. Eight hundred years ago, a saint
travelled from Arabia, passing through many lands before reaching Ajmer. Here
he brought together different communities who lived peacefully around his
The teachings and message of Khwaja Gharib Nawaz have been of an
exceptional character. His simple teachings penetrated even a stony heart; his
could silence the fiercest enemy; he brought the message of
universal love and peace. Chishti sufis who succeeded him continued the
tradition set by him. They were truly the pioneers in national integration.
The teachings of Khwaja Sahib have been recorded in several books. For him,
one who possesses the magnanimity of the river, the kindness of the sun and
humility of the earth is closest to God. Khwaja Sahib said that the noblest
character is possessed by one who is graceful in poverty, content in hunger,
cheerful in grief and friendly in hostility. According to this great saint, the surest
way to avoid the punishment of hell is to feed the hungry, to redress the
aggrieved and to help the distressed. Khwaja Sahib gave a role model of Aarif,
one who considers death as his friend, comfort as his enemy and always
remembers God. An Aarif fears, respects and possesses shyness.
Why can't we conduct ourselves as Aarifs? I wondered. Before any action,
ask yourself this question: 'Is what I am about to say or do going to bring me
peace?' As Dyer says,
if the answer is yes, proceed wholeheartedly with it and
you will be allowing yourself the wisdom of your highest self. If the answer is
no, be cautious of your ego that is at work. The ego promotes turmoil because it
separates you from everyone, including God. At Khwaja Sahib's shrine I could
listen to the voice that only wants you to be at peace with yourself.
Ajmer is located in the picturesque Aravalli range. Besides the Dargah Sharif
it has the holy lake of Pushkar. These two holy places symbolize, as it were, the
abiding amity between the two major religions of India. Ajmer presents a model
of a peaceful society. I performed namaz as a thanksgiving for this amity. The
scene reminded me of the similar location of two other religious centres, Nagore
Dargah and Velankanni church.
On 2 October 2001 I visited Amritanandamayee's Amrita Institute of
Computer Technology near Kollam in Kerala with Prof. N. Balakrishnan of the
IISc. and G. Madhavan Nair, Director, VSSC. I
addressed about 1,000 young
students, teachers, brahmacharis and swamis. The topic I selected was 'Multi
Dimensions of Knowledge Products.' I found in the students a high level of
receptivity to new ideas. In their questions, they showed interest not only in
technological development but also in adhering to an honest way of life. After
the interaction with the students I met Amma. It was a remarkable experience.
How can one take oneself closer to God was the message she was giving to
the people. I wondered at the extraordinary effort that had gone into setting up an
institution which could build hospitals, set up management schools of high
calibre, and provide housing schemes for the economically weaker sections of
society. My query led to a discussion with Amma and the other sanyasis. Though
the institution imparts education in all major disciplines of knowledge and
creates engineers, medical doctors, management graduates and science research
scholars, they are still circumscribed by their individual specialization. Amma
'Something is missing. How to connect?'
What she was referring to was bringing together these capabilities for a joint
I was at Christ College, Rajkot, getting ready for a function there when there
was a call from Swami Nikhileswarananda of the Ramakrishna Mission.
Swamiji requested me to visit his ashram and I had to agree. After the function at
Christ College, I rushed to the ashram. It was the time for the evening bhajan
and so touched was I by the singers' serene invocation that I sat down with them
for nearly fifteen minutes, lost in meditation. Here too I felt the same vibrations
as I did while meditating at Swami Vivekananda Hall, Porbandar, the birthplace
On 6 October 2001, the Sankaracharyas of Kanchi organized a very important
gathering of farmers from hundreds of villages to launch integrated development
through the concept of knowledge- empowered rural development. I was invited
to participate. Panchayat heads belonging to various political parties converged
to discuss development under a project designed to Provide Urban
facilities in Rural Areas (PURA). I was struck by the fact that spiritual leaders
were helping focus programmes for development.
When the meeting ended both Acharyas called me for a private meeting.
Swami Jayendra Saraswathigal inquired about the crashlanding of the helicopter
and blessed me. Swami Vijayendra Saraswathigal conveyed to me that the
maulvi of a very famous 300- year-old mosque was waiting in the mutt to take
me to the mosque. Swamiji suggested that I visit the mosque.
His message brought to my mind an incident in Paramacharya's time, a
decade ago, as told by the former President, R. Venkataraman. Mr Venkataraman
showed me the mosque very close to the Kanchi mutt. A few years ago, the
mosque jamayath (authorities) and the district authorities decided to relocate the
mosque to some other suitable place as its present location was inconvenient
both for the mutt and mosque. As a large number of people visit
mosque and there are huge gatherings at the mutt too, the traffic was becoming
difficult to manage. The mutt would rebuild the mosque in its new location.
Somehow this message reached the Paramacharya. He vehemently opposed the
whole idea. He said, 'In fact, when at 4.30 a.m. the call for namaz comes from
the mosque, it acts as a wake-up call for my divine duties.' And also for many
other reasons he was opposed to the relocation of the mosque. He made this
clear to both the district authorities and the mutt. The Paramacharya went into
mouna vridham- deep silence. Finally, shifting of the mosque was stopped.
I later went to the mosque and met the maulvi and kazi and offered namaz
there. About fifty students were learning the Holy Quran. I sat with them and
asked them to recite the Alhamthu, the sura that embodies the Quran. In Kanchi,
I was privileged to see vedic recitation and recitations from the Quran
proceeding side by side. Therein lies the greatness and essence of India. Can
Kanchi's integrated approach towards learning become a beacon for us and later
During the discussion in the Sankara College of Engineering among Sanskrit
professors, students and teachers, presided over by the Sankaracharyas, it
became clear that ancient Sanskrit literature is a storehouse of scientific
principles and methodology, even to the extent of there being texts about how to
build a viman (aeroplane). Subjects like physics, chemistry, medicine and
ayurveda are, of course, well documented. There was a consensus that the work
of our ancient scholars and scientists should be thoroughly examined and where
possible integrated with modern science.
An invitation came from the Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning at
Whitefield for Prof. Rama Rao and me. The day began with a morning prayer at
7.00 followed by a discourse rendered in poetic form. Its subject was how to
remove hatred from our hearts-by sacrificing the ego and substituting love in its
place. When Sai Baba
moved amidst the devotees, the effect of his healing
presence on people's pain, difficulties and problems was immediately apparent.
In January 2002, I attended a conference on Medical Technology and
Healthcare at Whitefield. All through the conference, which began at 9.30 in the
morning and ended at 8 in the evening, Sri Sathya Sai Baba was present. He
blessed every presentation and when I finished my five- minute presentation on
how technology would transform human life-an example being the cardiac stent
that we had made- he got up and blessed me, to the cheers of participants.
I was impressed to see his interest in the conference, as I had been impressed
by the speciality hospital at Whitefield that I had visited earlier. He had been told
that Chennai was facing a water problem. So, when he announced that he would
ensure water flowed to the city, it was more heartening still.
On 3 February 2002, I had an
extraordinary spiritual experience when I visited
the Brahma Kumari Spiritual Academy at Mount Abu. The deity of the Brahma
Kumaris, Shiva Baba, descended on one of the disciples, Dhadhi Gurzar. Before
our eyes, her personality changed. Her face became radiant, her voice became
deeper as she talked about the four treasures: Knowledge, Yoga, Virtue and
Service. We- I, Sivathanu Pillai, and Selvamurthy-were lucky to be called by
her to the dais and blessed. As she blessed us she said, 'Bharat will become the
most beautiful land on earth.'
My interaction with the Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) patients, popularly
known as 'Dilwalas', at the Global Hospital and Research Centre of the Brahma
Kumari Academy headed by Dr Pratap Midha, clearly illustrated that the mind -
body interaction, a subject I touched upon at the end of the previous chapter, is
vital for health which is defined as physical, mental and spiritual well-being. My
friend Dr W. Selvamurthy postulated through years of clinical work
and meditation significantly alleviate pain. The experiments, which I had the
opportunity of initiating through the Defence Institute of Physiology & Allied
Sciences (DIPAS) when I was Scientific Adviser to Defence Minister, include a
new approach towards healing through mind - body synchrony. Dr Pratap
Midha and Dr Selvamurthy joined together and formulated a unique treatment
for cardiac patients. When I reviewed this project, two years back, about sixty
patients reported an improved sense of well-being. Now, it has yielded excellent
results with 400 patients reporting progress. The treatment included lifestyle
intervention with Raja Yoga meditation for stress management, low-fat high-
fibre diet for reducing risk of hyper lipidemia and regular aerobic exercise or
walking to improve the cardio-vascular and metabolic efficiency. I hope that
medical treatment will begin to lay greater emphasis on healing not only the
body but also the mind.
During my previous visit to the Brahma
Kumari Spiritual Academy at Mount
Abu, Sister Usha had given me the task of interacting in a group discussion with
thirty Brahma Kumaris who had recently joined. It was a pleasure to look at their
bright faces bubbling with enthusiasm. In a post-dinner session when I asked
them in turn about their mission in life, the reply was unanimous: to serve the
people through spiritual endeavour. Dr Selvamurthy and I were moved to recite a
Tamil poem composed 1,000 years ago by Awaiyar which in translation reads
'It is rare to be born as a human being
It is still more rare to be born without any deformity
Even if you are born without any deformity
It is rare to acquire knowledge and education
Even if one could acquire knowledge and education
It is still rare to do offerings and tapas
But for one who does offerings and tapas
The doors of heaven open to greet him.'
I then narrated to the Brahma Kumaris how the Bishop at Thumba allowed
transfer of the land belonging to the church for setting up a space research
station (as given in chapter three of this book). What is the conclusion to be
drawn from this story? I asked them. The Brahma Kumaris responded by saying
that our civilization is rich, which leads to forward thinking, harmony and better
understanding. With such a great nation and people, why are there communal
clashes? I think that when a nation doesn't have a vision, small minds take over
The unification of science and spirituality will be essential to take the benefit
of science and technology to mankind. In 1911, Sri Aurobindo wrote in the
'A time will come when the Indian mind will shake off the darkness
that has fallen upon it, cease to think or hold opinions at second and third hand
and reassert its right to judge and enquire with perfect freedom into the meaning
of its own culture and tradition.'
That is the future we need to work towards as we shake off the shackles of
There was one message common to all the places I visited-there is a higher
self within you that transcends the limitations of the physical world. I felt the
presence of this higher self in my father.
I have learned over the years to maintain my equanimity regardless of
circumstances. I have faced failures and disappointments without feeling
defeated. I wish to live the rest of my life at peace with myself and others. I have
no wish to engage in quarrels with others.
This is the challenge before the individual as he tries to transcend his
At this point, I recall a sura from the Holy Quran.
'O Prophet, you proclaim to the people
Who do not accept your preaching,
What you worship, I do not worship,
And what I worship, you do not worship;
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The result of your actions belongs to you,
The result of my actions belongs to me.'
What we are, what we believe in, is ours alone. Once we have trust in the
wisdom that created us, we can develop a faith that sustains us through our lives.
Indians are well versed with the concept of higher self, or perhaps highest self
is the preferable term. For generations our ancestors lived their lives by this
concept. But for many today, rooted perhaps too deeply in the material world,
this idea sounds lofty and spiritual. For me it has been a cornerstone of the way I
On one occasion, as I was leaving for Bangalore, I spoke to a friend of mine
and told him that I would be talking to young people and whether he had any
suggestions. He did not offer any suggestions as such, but offered me these
'When you speak, speak the truth; perform when you promise; discharge your trust
withhold your hands from striking,
and from taking that which is unlawful and bad
'What actions are most excellent? To gladden the heart of a human being, to feed the hungry,
to help the afflicted, to lighten the sorrow of the sorrowful and to remove the wrongs of the
'All God's creatures are His family; and he is the most beloved of God who tries to do most
good to God's creatures.'
These are the sayings of Prophet Mohammad. My friend who told me this is a
greatgrandson of a Deekshidar of Tamil Nadu and grandson of a Ganapathigal
(vedic scholar). He is none other than Y.S. Rajan.
Such an outlook is possible only in our country. Let us remember the Rig
Veda: 'Aano bhadrah kratavo yenthu vishwathaha.' That is, 'Let noble thoughts
come to us from every side.'
I recall an event that took place in my family. My grandfather and
greatgrandfather were called Ambalakarar-noble leaders- in Rameswaram. This
island has the privilege
of being known as the place where Lord Rama is said to
have launched his campaign against Ravana. The island celebrates this event by
organizing his marriage with Sita- his divine counterpart. My greatgrandfather
would provide a floating platform for the occasion to carry the decorated vigraha
through the holy tank named Ramar Theertham. The tank is very deep. The
floating platform with vigraha, bedecked with beautiful gold ornaments, of Lord
Rama is taken round a small mandapa at the centre of the tank. Then and now,
all of Rameswaram assembles for the occasion.
One year, my greatgrandfather was witnessing the event when a mishap took
place. The vigraha toppled down and sank. Without any hesitation or prompting,
he jumped into the tank and recovered the vigraha as the entire town watched.
The temple priests instituted muthal mariathai (first honour) for our family.
There was a special prayer in the Rameswaram mosque to thank the Almighty
for the recovery of
the vigraha and to bring God's grace on our family.
I have always considered this incident as a shining example of human
brotherhood and harmony, specially significant in today's context. Could not
each of us help nurture such a brotherhood wherever we happen to be?
On 15 August 1947, my high school teacher, Rev. Iyyadurai Solomon, took
me to hear the midnight freedom speech of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. We were
all moved to hear him say that we were free. Banner headlines announced the
momentous event in next day's newspapers. But alongside the report of
Panditji's speech in the Tamil newspaper I read, was another news item, one that
has been embedded in my memory. It was about how Mahatma Gandhi was
walking barefoot in Noakhali, to help assuage the pain of the riot-affected
families there. Normally, as Father of the Nation, Mahatma Gandhi should have
been on the ramparts of Red Fort, the first one to unfurl the
Instead, he was at Noakhali. Such was the Mahatma's greatness, and what an
everlasting impact it left on the mind of a schoolboy!
Having sensed the pulse of the young, and armed with the wisdom of the
elders, I thought deeply about my own experiences with technology projects
where people worked on problems that were new and demanded efforts that
were unprecedented. What really makes one succeed in the face of difficult
tasks? We have talked about the importance of having a dream and of
commitment, of hard work and having the spiritual strength to persevere through
difficulties and failures. Is there anything missing in the cycle of creation?
Our spiritual wisdom has been our strength. We survived as a nation the
onslaughts of invaders and the numbing effects of colonialism. We have also
learnt to adjust to the rifts and divisions in our own society. But in the process of
adjustment, we also lowered our aims and expectations. We must regain
our broad outlook and draw upon our heritage and wisdom to enrich our lives.
The fact that we advance techonologically does not preclude spiritual
development. We need to home-grow our own model of development based on

Patriotism Beyond Politics and Religion
I do not care for liberation, I would rather go to a hundred thousand hells, 'doing good to
others (silently) like the spring', this is my religion.
Walking has been an essential part of my life. Wherever I go I make it a point to
walk five kilometres in the morning. I am particularly attached to seeing the
beauty of the sunrise, the light that precedes its arrival and my ears are tuned to
birds sing to welcome the dawning of a new day on this planet.
Each time I experience these phenomena-the cool breeze, the singing of the
birds and the arrival of the sun-I am filled with awe at how nature brings
together all the elements that go into making this moment possible and feel
I have been fortunate in that my work has taken me to very many beautiful
places that opened up my mind to the cosmic reality. One such was Chandipur in
From Kolkata, the distance to Balasore is around 234 km and Chandipur is 16
km from the town. The name means the abode of the Goddess Chandi or Durga.
The beach here is surely among the finest in India. At low tide the water recedes
three kilometres as the tides follow their rhythmic cycle.
The lonely beach, the whispering of tamarisk trees and the cool breeze create
a feeling of extraordinary calm. I used to walk on the beach to the mouth of the
river Suwarnarekha. The river's vast spread and the bewitching, ceaseless ripples
were hypnotic in their effect. It was a feeling as close to bliss as I
We started test-firing our missiles from the Sriharikota Range of ISRO but
needed our own missile test range. The Interim Test Range (ITR) was
established in 1989 as a dedicated range for launching missiles, rockets and
flight test vehicles. A number of missiles of different class including the multi-
role Trishul, multi-target capable Akash, the anti-tank Nag missile, the surface-
to-surface missile Prithvi, and the long-range technology demonstrator Agni
have been test-fired from the ITR. BrahMos, the Indo-Russian joint venture set
up to develop supersonic cruise missiles, has also been tested at this range. The
ITR has also supported a number of other missions such as testing of the multi-
barrel rocket launcher Pinaka and the pilotless aircraft Lakshya.
The ITR has also been made capable for testing airborne weapons and systems
with the help of sophisticated instrumentation. Thrust areas include tracking
long-range missiles, air defence missile systems, weapons
the Light Combat Aircraft (LCA), multi-target weapon systems and high-
The ITR extends 17 km along the seacoast where a number of tracking
instruments have been deployed along the flight path of the test vehicles. Some
of the significant test facilities at the ITR are a mobile and fixed electro-optical
tracking system, mobile S-band tracking radar, fixed C-band tracking radar,
fixed and mobile telemetry system, range computer, photo processing system,
meteorological system and range safety systems. An expert system has been
developed for aiding safety decisions during launch. The ITR is slowly but
surely growing into a world-class range.
It was a hot and humid midnight sometime in July 1995. We were going
through the results of the fourth consecutive successful flight of Prithvi. People's
faces were lit up with success. There was a mood of celebration. More than
thirty of us, representing 1,200 hard-working team members, were pondering
question-what next? Lt. Gen. Ramesh Khosla, Director General
Artillery, suggested that the Army needed a flight test on a land range with the
accuracy of impact at the final destination within 150 meters. This is called
Circular Error Probability (CEP) in technical terms.
We opened a geographical map of India. There were five tiny dots at a
distance of 70 to 80 km from ITR. These are the Wheeler Islands. We could not
go to the Rajasthan desert for obvious reasons. The Andaman and Nicobar
Islands are far away. At 2.00 a.m. we decided that Wheeler Islands were the right
choice for the missile impact test. Now the search for a suitable island started. A
helicopter was used to survey the area. Someone proposed asking the fishermen
to guide us to the islands.
My two colleagues, Saraswat and Salwan, drove to a place called Dhamra.
From Dhamra, they hired a boat for the day for Rs. 250. By the time they
reached the island it was almost dark. Salwan had carried fruits for eating during
the journey but these
eventually became their dinner. There was no option but to
stay on the island. It was a beautiful night but my friends, neither familiar with
the sea nor used to being marooned on a deserted island, spent it rather
fearfully-though they won't confess it and claim instead that they enjoyed it.
Early the next morning, they began their survey of the island, which is about 3
km long and 800 metres wide. To their surprise, they saw on the eastern side of
the island a Bangladesh flag flying atop a tree with huts nearby. The island was
probably frequented by fishermen from the neighbouring country. My friends
quickly removed the flag.
Things moved fast thereafter. The district authorities, including forest and
environment officers, visited the island. Soon after, I got the Defence Minister's
clearance to acquire the islands. The formalities were gone through with the
Orissa government and the forest department to transfer the land. I personally
met the concerned senior officials to make the file move to the desk of the Chief
Minister. I also wrote a detailed letter
to the Chief Minister explaining why we
needed the islands for DRDO work, specially for use as a range for experimental
We had already done preparatory work before moving the application. There
were typical questions about fishing activity in the vicinity, the disturbance that
might be caused to turtle migration and above all the cost of the islands. Within
ten days we got an appointment from the Chief Minister. I had heard a lot about
Chief Minister Biju Patnaik, particularly about his days as a pilot and his
friendship with President Sukarno. When I entered the Chief Minister's
chambers with Maj. Gen. K.N. Singh and Salwan, he welcomed us warmly. To
me he exclaimed, 'Oh my friend Kalam, I have followed your work from the
time of Dr Sarabhai to now. Whatever you ask, I will give.' In my presence he
signed the Orissa government's decision to give to DRDO all the four islands
and said, 'Kalam, I have given the approval you asked for, I know you will use it
well. Your mission-the missile programme-is very important to the country.
from Orissa will be yours.' Then, suddenly, he held me and
gave me a very affectionate hug. He said in a demanding tone, 'Kalam, you have
to give me a promise and assurance to the nation. The day India makes its own
ICBM I shall be stronger as an Indian.' There was silence. I had to respond
immediately. Biju Patnaik was a man with a tremendous personality and deeply
impressive as a leader too, one whose love for the nation transcended politics. I
looked straight into his eyes and said, 'Sir, we will work for your mission. I will
discuss your thought in Delhi.'
Some forty years ago, the daredevil Biju Patnaik piloted his Kalinga Airways
plane into Jakarta to find Indonesian President Sukarno in the first flush of
fatherhood. Sukarno's wife had delivered a baby, and the family was searching
for a name for the newborn girl when Bijuda called on them.
Sukarno explained the problem on hand to the visitor from India. Biju Patnaik
cast his mind back to the clouds that had greeted the baby's arrival and suggested
equivalent for them. Sukarno's daughter was promptly christened
Megawati and thus the daughter of the leader of the world's largest Muslim
nation got a Hindu name. For great men, religion is a way of making friends;
small people make religion a fighting tool.
Many years later, after several political upheavals, Megawati Sukarnoputri
would become first the Vice President and then the President of Indonesia.
Lament, my friend, at the passing away of a generation of politicians with a
voice, vision and reach that went far beyond our borders. Lament at our State-
sponsored, abnormal and paranoid fixation with a particular country that has
blinded us to the rest of the world, including the Third World, which we used to
head not so long ago. And weep softly at what we have reduced ourselves to in
the comity of nations. For a large country with a billion people, a country with a
thriving industry and a large pool of scientific talent, a country, moreover, that is
a nuclear power, India does not count for as much as it should. In terms of our
affairs, probably no other country is so far below its potential
After Pokhran II, the West speaks about India and Pakistan in the same breath.
Is it not in our national interest to demonstrate to the world that we can think of a
world beyond Pakistan, that we are a qualitatively better, more mature and
secular country with a greater commitment to the values of democracy and
During March 2002, I was teaching about 200 final year students of
engineering at Anna University and I gave a series of ten lectures on
'Technology and Its Dimensions'. On the final day of the interaction, there was a
discussion on Dual Use Technologies. One of the students raised a question.
'Sir, I have recently come across Dr Amartya Sen's statement that the nuclear
weapon test conducted in May 1998 by India was ill conceived. Dr Amartya Sen
is a great economist and a Nobel laureate who is much respected for his ideas on
development. A comment from such a personality cannot be ignored. What is
your view on his comments?'
'I acknowledge the greatness of Dr Amartya Sen in the field of economic
development and admire his suggestions, such as that thrust should be given to
primary education,' I said. 'At the same time, it seemed to me that Dr Sen looked
at India from a Western perspective. In his view, India should have a friendly
relationship with all countries to enhance its economic prosperity. I agree, but we
must also bear in mind India's experience in the past. Pandit Nehru spoke in the
United Nations against nuclear proliferation and advocated zero nuclear
weapons in all the countries. We know the result. One should note that there are
more than 10,000 nuclear warheads on American soil, another 10,000 nuclear
warheads are on Russian soil and there are a number of them in the UK, China,
France, Pakistan and some other countries. The START II and the recent
agreements between the USA and Russia only talk about reducing the number of
nuclear warheads to 2,000 each and even these agreements are limping. Nobody
takes the reduction of warheads in
serious terms. There should be a movement
by those who are against the May 1998 test in America and Russia or other
Western countries to achieve zero nuclear weapons status. It is essential to
remember that two of our neighbouring countries are armed with nuclear
weapons and missiles. Can India be a silent spectator?'
India has been invaded in the last 3,000 years by a succession of conquerors,
including the British, French, Dutch and Portuguese, either to enlarge their
territory or to spread a religion or to steal the wealth of our country. Why is it
India never invaded other countries (with a few exceptions in the Tamil
kingdoms)? Is it because our kings were not brave enough? The truth is Indians
were tolerant and never understood the true implications of being ruled by others
for generations. But after the long independence struggle when we got our
freedom and the country got united and has physical boundaries, is it possible to
remain with economic prosperity as the only goal? The only way to show the
strength of the country
is the might to defend it. Strength respects strength and
not weakness. Strength means military might and economic prosperity. The
decisions and policies of the United Nations Security Council are dictated by the
countries who possess nuclear weapons. How is it we did not get a seat in the
Security Council so far but now other nations are recommending that India be
In this regard, there is another incident I would like to narrate. My friend,
Admiral L. Ramdas, who retired as the naval chief, told me that he and a group
of people would hold a demonstration before Parliament protesting against the
nuclear test carried out in May 1998. I replied to my friend that he and his group
should first demonstrate in front of the White House and the Kremlin against the
large quantity of nuclear warheads and ICBMs there.
I call to my people to rise to greatness. It is a call to all Indians to rise to their
highest capabilities. What are the forces which lead to the rise or fall of nations?
And what are the factors which go to make a
nation strong? Three factors are
invariably found in a strong nation: a collective pride in its achievements, unity
and the ability for combined action.
For a people and a nation to rise to the highest, they must have a common
memory of great heroes and exploits, of great adventures and triumphs in the
past. If the British rose to great heights it is because they had great heroes to
admire, men like Lord Nelson, say, or the Duke of Wellington. Japan represents
a fine example of national pride. The Japanese are proud of being one people,
having one culture, and because of that they could transform a humiliating
military defeat into a triumphant economic victory.
All nations which have risen to greatness have been characterized by a sense
of mission. The Japanese have it in large measure. So do the Germans. In the
course of three decades, Germany was twice all but destroyed. And yet its
people's sense of destiny never dimmed. From the ashes of the Second World
War, it has emerged a
nation economically powerful and politically assertive. If
Germany can be a great nation, why can't India?
Unfortunately for India, historic forces have not given a common memory to
all communities by taking them back to their roots a millennium down the ages.
Not enough effort has been made in the last fifty years to foster that memory.
I had the fortune of learning many of our religions in the country from my
childhood, in high school and then onwards for nearly seventy years. One aspect
I realize is that the central theme of any religion is spiritual well-being. Indeed it
should be understood that the foundation of secularism in India has to be derived
It is because our sense of mission has weakened that we have ceased to be true
to our culture and ourselves. If we come to look upon ourselves as a divided
people with no pride in our past and no faith in the future, what else can we look
forward to except frustration, disappointment and despair?
In India, the core culture goes beyond time. It precedes the arrival of Islam; it
precedes the arrival of Christianity. The early Christians, like the Syrian
Christians of Kerala, have retained their Indianness with admirable
determination. Are they less Christian because their married women wear the
mangalsutra or their menfolk wear the dhoti in the Kerala style? Kerala's Chief
Minister, A.K. Antony, is not a heretic because he and his people are part of
Kerala's culture. Being a Christian does not make him an alien. On the contrary,
it gives an added dimension to his Indianness. A.R. Rahman may be a Muslim
but his voice echoes in the soul of all Indians, of whatever faith, when he sings
The greatest danger to our sense of unity and our sense of purpose comes from
those ideologists who seek to divide the people. The Indian Constitution bestows
on all the citizens total equality under its protective umbrella. What is now cause
for concern is the trend towards putting religious form over religious sentiments.
we develop a cultural-not religious-context for our heritage that
serves to make Indians of us all? The time has come for us to stop
differentiating. What we need today is a vision for the nation which can bring
It is when we accept India in all its splendid glory that, with a shared past as a
base, we can look forward to a shared future of peace and prosperity, of creation
and abundance. Our past is there with us forever. It has to be nurtured in good
faith, not destroyed in exercises of political oneupmanship.
The developed India will not be a nation of cities. It will be a network of
prosperous villages empowered by telemedicine, tele- education and e-
commerce. The new India will emerge out of the combination of biotechnology,
biosciences and agriculture sciences and industrial development. The political
leaders would be working with the zeal born of the knowledge that the nation is
bigger than individual interests and political parties. This attitude will lead to
minimizing the rural-urban divide as
progress takes place in the countryside and
urbanites move to rural areas to absorb the best of what nature can give in the
form of products and wealth.
The most important and urgent task before our leadership is to get all the
forces for constructive change together and deploy them in a mission mode.
India is a country of one billion people with numerous religions and
communities. It offers a wide spectrum of ideologies, besides its geographic
diversity. This is our greatest strength. However, fragmented thinking,
compartmentalized planning and isolated efforts are not yielding results. The
people have to come together to create a harmonious India.
The second vision of the nation will bring about a renaissance to the nation.
The task of casting a strong India is in the hands of a visionary political
There are success stories among failures. There is hope among chaos, promise
among problems. We are one billion people with multiple faiths and ideologies.
In the absence of a national vision cracks at the seam keep surfacing and make
us vulnerable. There is a need to reinforce this seam and amalgamate us into one

Wisdom is a weapon to ward off destruction; It is an inner fortress which enemies cannot
Ancient India was an advanced knowledge society. Invasions and colonial rule
destroyed its institutions and robbed it of its core competence. Its people have
been systematically degraded to lower levels of existence. By the time the
British left, our youth had lowered their aims and were
ordinary livelihood. India is essentially a land of knowledge and it must
rediscover itself in this aspect. Once this rediscovery is done, it will not require
much struggle to achieve the quality of life, strength and sovereignty of a
Knowledge has many forms and it is available at many places. It is acquired
through education, information, intelligence and experience. It is available in
academic institutions, with teachers, in libraries, in research papers, seminar
proceedings and in various organizations and workplaces with workers,
managers, in drawings, in process sheets and on the shop floors. Knowledge,
though closely linked to education, comes equally from learning skills such as
those possessed by our artists, craftsmen, hakims, vaidyas, philosophers and
saints, as also our housewives. Knowledge plays a very important role in their
performance and output too. Our heritage and history, the rituals, epics and
traditions that form part of our consciousness are also vast resources of
knowledge as are our libraries and universities. There is an abundance of
unorthodox, earthy wisdom in our villages. There are hidden treasures of
knowledge in our environment, in the oceans, bioreserves and deserts, in the
plant and animal life. Every state in our country has a unique core competence
for a knowledge society.
Knowledge has always been the prime mover of prosperity and power. The
acquisition of knowledge has therefore been the thrust area throughout the
world. Additionally, in India, there has been a culture of sharing it, not only
through the tradition of guru - shishya but also by its spread to neighbouring
countries through travellers who came to Nalanda and other universities drawn
by their reputation as centres of learning. India is endowed with natural and
competitive advantages as also certain distinctive competencies. But these are
scattered in isolated pockets and the awareness of these is inadequate. During the
last century the world has changed from being an agricultural society, in which
manual labour was the critical factor, to an industrial society where the
management of technology, capital and labour provide the competitive
advantage. In the twenty-first century, a new society is emerging where
knowledge is the primary production resource instead of capital and labour.
Efficient utilization of this existing knowledge base can create wealth for us in
the form of better health, education and other indicators of progress. The ability
to create and maintain the knowledge infrastructure, to enhance skills and
increase productivity through the exploitation of advances in various fields will
be the key factors in deciding the prosperity of this society. Whether a nation
qualifies as a knowledge society is judged by how effectively it deals with
knowledge creation and knowledge deployment.
The knowledge society has two very important components driven by societal
transformation and wealth generation. The societal transformation is in respect
of education, healthcare, agriculture and
governance. These will lead to
employment generation, high productivity and rural prosperity.
The task of wealth generation for the nation has to be woven around national
competencies. The TIFAC task team has identified core areas that will spearhead
our march towards becoming a knowledge society. The areas are: information
technology, biotechnology, space technology, weather forecasting, disaster
management, telemedicine and tele-education, technologies utilizing traditional
knowledge, service sector and infotainment which is the emerging area resulting
from convergence of information and entertainment. These core technologies,
fortunately, can be interwoven by IT, a sector that took off only due to the
enterprising spirit of the young.
Thus there are multiple technologies and appropriate management structures
that have to work together to generate a knowledge society. With India carving a
niche for itself in information technology, the country is uniquely placed to fully
on the opportunity to quickly transform itself into a knowledge
society. The methodology of wealth generation in these core areas and to be able
to meet an export target set at $50 billion by the year 2008, especially through
the IT sector, is a subject that is currently under discussion. Also being discussed
is how best to simultaneously develop the capability to generate information
technology products worth $30 billion domestically to pump in for societal
transformation. I am glad that the Planning Commission has taken a lead in
generating a roadmap for transforming India into a knowledge society. I had the
opportunity to be the Chairman of the Steering Committee set up for this task.
Evolving suitable policy and administrative procedures, changes in regulatory
methods, identification of partners and, most important, creation of young and
dynamic leaders are the components that have to be put in place. In order to
generate wealth, which is the second component for establishing a knowledge
society, it is essential
that simultaneously a citizen-centric approach to shaping
of business policy, user-driven technology generation and intensified industry -
lab - academia linkages have also to be established.
Becoming a knowledge superpower by the year 2010 is a very important
mission for the nation. While a knowledge society has a two-dimensional
objective of societal transformation and wealth generation, a third dimension
emerges if India is to transform itself into a knowledge superpower. This is
knowledge protection and it entails a tremendous responsibility. It is very
important that our communication network and information generators are
protected from electronic attacks through surveillance and monitoring. There
should be a focussed approach to intellectual property rights and related issues,
and our ancient knowledge and culture too are part of our resource base and need
to be protected as such.
In 1960, the agriculture sector employed in part or in full 74 per cent of the
population. This came down to 62 per cent
in 1992 and is expected to further fall
to 50 per cent by 2010, though the demand of agricultural products will double
by then. Higher productivity and better post-harvest management will have to
compensate for the manpower reduction in the farming and agricultural products
There was a function in Chennai organized by the Manipal Academy of
Higher Education who felicitated me along with the father of the Green
Revolution, C. Subramaniam, and eminent lawyer N.A. Palkhivala. After the
function, I shared with the ninety-year-old Subramaniam his vision of a second
green revolution. He told me about his dream of setting up a national agro
foundation that would develop hybrid seeds. His foundation would adopt small
and marginal farmers and provide them with laboratory facilities for soil testing
and access to information on the weather and markets, so that they could earn
more through enhanced yields and better prices for what they produced. He
aimed at bringing a million farmers under the scheme. Visionaries don't age!
On another occasion, I was talking to the students of Dr Mahalingam College
of Engineering and Technology at Pollachi, near Coimbatore. Dr N.
Mahalingam, a great industrialist and academician, was sitting with me. He was
telling me how the country can generate wealth through agro, chemical and
textile industries. Amazed by his achievements in establishing industries and
educational institutions, I asked him, 'Sir, what is your next mission?' As I said
this, I realized I was asking this question of a person who was about eighty years
Dr Mahalingam replied, 'I have analysed the Tamil scripts used in the last
Sangam, which was 2,500 years ago. Now I would like to do research on the
Tamil scripts used in the first Sangam which existed 5,000 years ago!' It was
another reminder to me that visionaries don't age.
In the case of industry, in 1960, 11 per cent of the population was engaged in
small- scale and large-scale industries. The trend continued with 11 per cent
even in 1992. However, it has to increase to 25 per cent in
2010, bearing in mind
the envisaged GDP growth and increased competition as trade restrictions are
lifted under the WTO. The pattern of employment will take a new shape.
Employment in the service or knowledge industry has increased from 15 per cent
in 1960 to 27 per cent in 1992. And it will further increase to 50 per cent in view
of infrastructure maintenance areas and IT sector and entertainment demands.
This big change will demand more trained personnel. Our leaders in commerce
and industry have to prepare themselves for the transformation.
The fact that there is net migration from the villages to cities shows the
disparities in living standards between the two. Ideally, both rural and urban
areas should be equally attractive with no net migration either way. Near zero net
rural - urban migration is a mark of development. How can we achieve that
happy balance? Rural development is the only solution. This means providing
rural areas with the amenities that are currently available only in cities. This
would generate employment on the same scale, and at the
same level, as in the
cities in the rural areas too. The other challenge would be to provide these
benefits at a small fraction of the financial, social, cultural and ecological costs
the cities have to bear.
It is the expectation that this combination of generating employment bearing
in mind environmental factors will make rural areas as attractive as cities are, if
not even more attractive. Then, rural development may be expected to prevent, if
not actually reverse, rural - urban migration. Hence, PURA aims at integrated
physical, electronic knowledge and economic connectivity.
Experience in India has demonstrated that the true handicap suffered by rural
areas is poor connectivity and little else. Linking together a loop of villages by a
ring road and high-quality transport may rectify that lacuna. Villages thus linked
would also provide a large enough market to support a variety of services, which
they would not be able to do individually. The ring road and the transport service
together can convert the linked villages immediately into a virtual
market of tens of thousands of people. Such an area, which would also possess
state-of-the-art telecommunication connectivity, will have a high probability of
attaining rapid growth by setting up a virtuous cycle-more connected people
attracting more investment, and more investment attracting even more people
and so on. Basically, this involves selecting a ring of villages; connecting the
villages on the ring by establishing a high-quality transport and
telecommunication system; encouraging reputed specialists to locate schools,
hospitals and other social services around the ring; marketing this well-serviced
space to attract industry and commerce; and Internet connectivity.
The model envisaged a habitat designed to improve the quality of life in rural
places and made special suggestions to remove urban congestion. Naturally our
most intractable urban problem is that of congestion. Efficient supply of water
and effective waste disposal in every locality are the paramount civic needs.
minimum size below which a habitat is not viable and not competitive
with the existing congested city. At the same time, the existing congested city is
not economical compared to a new town once a minimum size of expansion is
crossed. As against a conventional city that is, say, rectangular in shape and
measuring 10 km by 6 km, the model considers an annular ring-shaped town
integrating minimum eight to ten villages of the same 60 square km area, and the
same access distance of 1 km to transport arteries. It needs only one
transportation route of a distance half that needed for the rectangular- shaped
city, so frequency of transportation will be doubled, halving waiting times. It has
zero number of junctions and needs only one route as against eight needed for
the rectangular plan, so people will no longer need to change from one line to
another. That saves transport time. Further, as all traffic is concentrated on one
single route, high-efficiency mass transportation systems become economical
even for a comparatively small population. This cuts costs substantially
more convenient for the people.
Rural development is an essential need for transforming India into a
knowledge superpower and high bandwidth rural connectivity is the minimum
requirement to take education and healthcare to the rural areas. Roadmaps for
development of certain areas have been generated and we have to work on their
There was an invitation by Mr Ratan Tata, Chairman of the Tata group of
companies, to visit Telco at Pune, particularly to witness the challenge of
designing, developing and manufacturing in the country a fully Indian car, the
Indica. The prospect of the visit excited me. I thought I would get an answer to
some questions that I have been asked on many occasions.
In 1980 when our team in ISRO launched the satellite launch vehicle and put
Rohini into low-earth orbit, it was a big event for the nation. On 4 January 2001,
when I saw the first prototype fighter aircraft, the Light Combat Aircraft (LCA),
designed and developed indigenously by the Aeronautical
(ADA), taking to the skies, again India was described as one of the few countries
to have acquired capabilities in this sophisticated field. This is the result of
intensified networking between R&D laboratories, industry, academic
institutions, users and the government.
Ratan Tata told me during the visit about his vision of making India a global
player in the automobile sector. To implement his vision, he decided to acquire
car manufacturing units from many countries rather than set them up here at
considerable expense in terms of money and time. He looked towards
manufacturing five times the present levels so that they could graduate to being
globally competitive. This is a beautiful idea. I would add that Indian industrial
complexes should become consortia as a first step and then envision becoming
I and my team are invited by a number of scientific, industrial, academic and
management institutions to share our experiences in the pursuit of some of the
national tasks I have mentioned. One question that came up during my
interaction with students in Mumbai rings in my mind even now.
'Dr Kalam, we are very happy to see that India can build and produce its own
SLVs and satellites, its own strategic missiles as also nuclear weapons and power
stations. Can you tell me when India will design and produce its own passenger
car with an Indian engine?'
When I was going through the design, manufacture of component, sub-
assembly, integration and testing plants at Telco and was told that the company
is producing about 60,000 cars annually, I was reminded of this question. I was
not only witnessing the answer to it but also the technological strength of our
I had another opportunity to see a concept take shape when Wipro invited me
to participate in a function to mark the commissioning of a mobile heart care
clinic at Bangalore in October 2000. This was a collaborative effort of Wipro-
Foundation and Klenzaids. My friend Arun Tiwari and I provided the
system concept for the project. It was a great experience for me. After the
inauguration I visited the Wipro-GE Centre that builds specialized medical
equipment using advanced technologies. As soon as I entered a young man
approached me and pinned a national flag on my shirt. I shook his hand and
asked him, 'Young man, will you stay and work for this country?'
He replied, 'Dr Kalam, I am in the profession of working on medical gadgets
that are used for diagnosis. I am committed to a profession in which one tries to
remove pain. I am needed here.' I was delighted by his answer. The centre itself
struck me as a positive collaboration between two nations in the field of
After the programme, Azim Premji, who heads Wipro, accompanied me to the
DRDO guest house. On the way, he explained how he was trying to assist
elementary schools in Karnataka so that more children could be brought into the
classroom. As we were
having tea at the guest house, I asked him, 'How has
Wipro reached its high stature in the business world?'
Premji gave a remarkable answer. 'Dr Kalam, I can say there are three aspects
that come to my mind. One: Sweat for generations and the hard work of teams.
Two: In Wipro we work for the customer's delight. Three: A bit of luck. The
third point will not be of any consequence if the first two aspects are not
achieved. In Wipro, what we have tried to do is wealth generation with social
A common thread runs through the experience of these institutions. It is that
we can deliver high-technology systems in spite of control and denial regimes.
The presence of a competitive environment, networking capabilities, wealth
generation with social concern and above all ignited minds of the young: these
are all very important ingredients for building a knowledge society.
Maharishi Patanjali said in the Yogasutra, 'When you are inspired by some
great purpose, some extraordinary project, all your
thoughts break their bounds:
Your mind transcends limitations, your consciousness expands in every
direction, and you find yourself in a new, great, and wonderful world. Dormant
forces, faculties, and talents become alive, and you discover yourself to be a
greater person by far than you ever dreamed yourself to be.'
That is something addressed to all of us. It is the people of a nation who make
it great. By their effort, the people in turn become important citizens of their
great country. Ignited minds are the most powerful resource on earth, and the one
billion minds of our nation are indeed a great power waiting to be tapped.
Ancient India was a knowledge society that contributed a great deal to
civilization. We need to recover that status and become a knowledge power. We
must learn from our mistakes to achieve a better standard of life. A developed
India will supplant a spirit of defeat with the spirit of victory.

Getting the Forces Together
Determine that things can and shall be done, and then we shall find the way.
As our experience reveals, progress is rapid wherever there is an efficient
administrative set-up, a high level of education and minimum political
interference in development activity. To me, development is a security-centric
phenomenon-from poverty to food security, social security and thereafter

we have identified five areas where India has a
core competence for integrated action.
First among these five is agriculture and food processing, where we have to
set a target of 360 million tonnes of food and agricultural production.
Agriculture and agro food processing, particularly by way of value addition,
would bring prosperity to the rural people and speed up economic growth.
The second area is power. A reliable supply of electricity in all parts of the
country is a must.
The third area is education and healthcare. Here we have found that education
and healthcare are interrelated. For example, Kerala with high literacy and better
healthcare could bring down the rate of population growth and improvement in
the quality of life in the state. Similarly, in Tamil Nadu too we have seen a fall in
the birth rate that is linked to these factors. Studies in Andhra Pradesh indicate a
similar trend. These trends need to be replicated in states like Bihar and Uttar
Pradesh, where levels of population growth remain high.
The fourth area is information technology. This is one of our core
competencies and holds the potential to rapidly transform backward areas,
besides promoting education and generating wealth.
The fifth area is the strategic sector. This area, fortunately, has witnessed
growth in areas like nuclear, space and defence technology.
Action in these five areas, properly integrated, would lead to food, economic,
social and national security. A strong partnership between the research and
development institutions, universities, industry and the community as a whole
with the government departments and agencies will be essential to accomplish
the vision. The key to success lies in connectivity.
The development of education and healthcare will yield the benefits of smaller
families and a more efficient workforce. It is the key to employability and social
development. Improvements in the agricultural sector, including that of food
processing, would lead to food security,
employment opportunities and rapid
economic growth. Growth in the information technology sector would assist
rapid economic growth as well as play an important part in speeding up
development. Electric power provides energy security so crucial for all sectors.
The strategic sector has a direct impact on industry, sustaining growth and
technological strength. For balanced development, all the five areas are of
importance. The combined effect of these five areas would result in GDP growth
rising from present 6 per cent to 10 per cent and the lives of 300 to 400 million
people who are presently living below the poverty line would be significantly
I worked with TIFAC teams in three areas-agriculture, advanced education
and rural connectivity. In doing so, I drew on my earlier experiences in the
mission areas of sugar, fly ash and composites. With Prof. S.K. Sinha, a
renowned agricultural scientist, TIFAC took up a project to enhance agricultural
productivity in central Bihar and eastern India. Six villages in one and nine
villages in the other region were selected during the kharif season of 1998. The
system approach consisted of soil analysis, seed choice, cultivation season,
fertilizer selection and training to the farmers. This intensive collaboration of
scientists and farmers resulted in substantial increase in wheat yields, which rose
from 2.5 tonnes per hectare to nearly 5 tonnes per hectare. When I and Y.S.
Rajan visited a few villages where this system approach is used, we found the
farmers showing an interest in new issues like equipment for faster harvesting,
storage facilities and marketing and banking systems. It was clear that a small
team, cutting across various departments, could work wonders even in a difficult
region, achieving results in a cost- and time-effective way.
Another experiment under way is REACH (Relevance and Excellence in
ACHieving new heights in education institutions). The purpose of this mission is
to establish 80 to 100 centres that follow common academic programmes and
share the commitment to achieve excellence. In
this endeavour, they work
together by interchange of faculty and joint research as need be. As part of this,
Centres of Relevance and Excellence (CORE) have been established in Patiala,
Dibrugarh, Mumbai, Thanjavur and Surat in the areas of agro and industrial
biotechnology, advanced computing and information processing, petroleum
reservoir engineering, industrial safety, environmental engineering and herbal
drugs. Our experience in the REACH programme is that industries are willing to
participate in specialized areas of their interest and they are also willing to invest
about 40 per cent of the total expenditure in establishing CORE. In return, they
will benefit in terms of skilled manpower and access to the results of research.
The willingness of industry to be partners in technology development and
education has helped our confidence a great deal. It was also satisfying to see Dr
M.S. Vijayaraghavan, Adviser in the office of the Principal Scientific Adviser,
blossom into a leader in the integrated learning system. His innovation
bring the commitment of industry to the learning programme.
Another example relates to the programme for rural connectivity evolved
under the leadership of Prof. P.V. Indiresan, who was formerly Director of IIT
Madras. As mentioned earlier, the fact that there is net migration from villages to
cities indicates that they offer more opportunities, and the only way to equalize
the flow is to develop the rural areas and bring life there on par with that in the
cities. Once employment opportunities increase there, as do the amenities
available, as per the model created by Prof. Indiresan, rural development may be
expected to prevent, if not actually reverse, rural - urban migration. Presently,
several technologies exist to make this possible, provided we use the
connectivity approach in various areas.
For the rural development programme called PURA, we have introduced the
concept of dynamic connectivity of four types called PEEK: Physics,
Electronics, Economics and Knowledge connectivities. One more
need is IT-driven telemedicine.
In May last year, I visited the CARE Hospital in Hyderabad. The whole place
had been geared up for a telemedicine trial and the hall was full of doctors,
communication engineers, computer scientists and software experts. Patients
were to be tested and advised through telemedicine. The patients would undergo
electrocardiography and tests for liver functioning. The novel thing was that the
patients were in a distant place, but the diagnosis would be done in Hyderabad.
The doctors and the patients interacted via satellite. The ECG data was
exchanged with high-resolution image transfer and clinical information provided
in real time. I could see the ultrasound images of liver and heart functioning of
the patients coming from a faraway hospital as specialists gave their opinion. It
looked like a very promising way to offer healthcare services in places that did
not have the medical facilities of a large city. Telemedicine could take advanced
medical technology to the rural villages and
help link up primary health centres,
area hospitals, district hospitals and speciality hospitals in the state capitals. To
me it was fascinating to see how it brought together engineering and medical
science to treat a patient irrespective of distance, using advances in satellite
communication and transmission of data.
It was in 1990, on a recommendation of a friend of mine, that I visited
Aravind Eye Hospital at Madurai for an eye check-up and treatment. Upon
entering I saw an orderly queue of patients awaiting their turn and joined it. The
queue was a long one but it was moving fast and within half an hour I was being
examined by Dr G. Natchiar and recommended treatment. That done, I went to
deposit the money for admission to the hospital. However, I had trouble paying
at the counter as the girl there refused to accept a cheque, and I had no cash. I
went to Dr Natchiar again and told her my predicament. She considered briefly
and agreed to admit me. I was treated and discharged after a few days. A few
I received a letter from Dr Natchiar apologizing for not having
recognized me. She came to know only when my security personnel enquired
about me at the hospital after my discharge.
I have visited the hospital often after that first visit. Dr G. Venkataswamy,
brother of Dr Natchiar, is a good friend, and I make it a point to meet him every
time I visit Madurai. Let me tell you a little more about Dr Venkataswamy and
his commitment to his work. The Aravind Eye Hospital handled more than 1.3
million outpatient visits in 2001. It conducted 190,000 surgeries and held about
1,500 eye screening camps. No wonder then that Dr Venkataswamy's hard work
has achieved recognition from WHO. The hospital provides training to students
from leading universities abroad, including Harvard and Johns Hopkins.
Dr Venkataswamy has become a superb surgeon despite what to many in his
position would be a crippling handicap: his fingers are twisted and frozen by
arthritis that struck him while he was a student in medical school.
One day, as we were talking he narrated this incident to me. An industrialist
from Delhi came to Dr Venkataswamy and said, 'I need to build a hospital, and I
am very much impressed with your hospital. Will you come and start a hospital
in Delhi for me?'
Dr Venkataswamy asked him, 'What is it that you want? You have the money;
it is not difficult for you to put up a hospital in Delhi. Why don't you just do it?'
The industrialist said, 'No, I want a hospital with the Aravind culture, people
are cordial here. They seem to respect people more than money. There is a
certain empathy or compassion that seems to flow from them.'
My own experience at the hospital bore this out. In the Aravind experience I
see the path that we need to take-a transformation of life into a powerful
instrument of right action.
As with medicine, in the same way, we shall see technology allied to different
fields, such as agriculture. But the overall purpose has to be to help the people
and meet their needs.
The vision of a developed India can be realized only if we recognize that
wealth generation and wealth protection are two sides of the same coin. A
nation's wealth represents the sweat and hard work of its people. The famous
Tamil poet Andal, who was regarded as one of the thirteen Vaishnavite Alwars,
in her famous work
invokes the blessings of God to provide in plenty
Neengatha Selvam (stable wealth) to the land. This is possible only with an
integrated approach towards development. Granted planners look individually at
the activities of various ministries and approve their action plans. However, if
these proposals were to be looked at not in isolation but in the context of
multiple-use planning, the benefits would multiply. Thus a technology, product
or a service resulting out of a particular programme of a department/ministry
should be mandated to be available to other departments/ministries at the stage
of plan approvals. This would provide the needed integration at the planning
approach needs to be put in place at other downstream activities.
An integrated mission approach would permit interweaving of measures to
generate wealth with similar steps for wealth protection. This is the hallmark of a
developed country and hence the key to a developed India.
Another aspect of a developed country is global competitiveness of its
industry. It is not only catering to the home market but also aiming for a large
market outside it. Hence, its contribution to GDP is also very large. This is a
prerequisite for India too in its development. Indian industry has to show the
same competitiveness and innovation so that we can have our own
Universal literacy and access to education for all is another fundamental
requirement for a nation to be truly developed. Education would result in the
creation of a large base of people who excel in various fields as well, an
invaluable resource for any country.
At present, however, there is a high degree of asymmetry in the educational
system. While there are many who aspire to
higher education, quality institutions
to impart this are few. This creates a large mismatch of demand and supply in
quality manpower and is starkly evident in emerging sunrise areas such as
information technology, biotechnology, environmental engineering and
manufacturing technology. The economic liberalization taking place will only
intensify such demand in coming years. Moreover higher education has also to
be made more relevant to industry and society, an aspect in which it is
One solution lies in fostering institutions with expertise in selected subjects of
relevance to industry and society. Some of the institutions which have excelled
this far could provide templates for the new ones. Lastly, the solution should be
implemented in a mission mode-only the mission objectives should be
paramount and all else subservient to these objectives.
To develop to the desired level, industry also needs to recognize the
importance of forward and backward linkages. While linkages with bridging
think tanks, technical/consultancy services, other firms
involved in similar activities as well as customers constitute the forward linkage,
partnership with universities, R&D labs and technology-providing institutions
would form the backward linkage. Investment in higher education is therefore
crucial for forming this backward linkage which would serve as a springboard
for Indian industry to make the jump to becoming a global player. We should not
hesitate to take a fast decision for establishing twenty more IITs and medical
institutions; whether they are promoted by Indian or foreign groups does not
matter as long as the bottom line remains excellence.
On 15 October 2000 a website designed for me by friends in the Ponn Group
was launched by the Infosys Chairman, N.R. Narayana Murthy, in the presence
of Prof. N. Balakrishnan of the IISc. Some of my friends asked me to post a few
questions on the website. My questions were three. First: 'India has been a
developing country for more than half a century. What would you as young boys
and girls like to do to make it a
developed India?' The second question was,
'When can I sing a song of India?' and the third, 'Why do we love anything
foreign in spite of our capabilities in many fields, whereas other countries
celebrate their own successes?' My only stipulation was that the answer should
come from youth aged under twenty.
More than a hundred answers and suggestions were received from within the
country and abroad. Five of these answers are relevant here.
One young man from Chandigarh responded, 'I will become a teacher (rather,
a professor of engineering) since I am good in, as well as enjoy, teaching and I
believe that one of the best ways in which to serve one's nation is to be either a
professor or a soldier ' A girl wrote from Pondichery, 'A single flower makes
no garland. I will work for a garland leading to unity of minds, as this is
needed for transforming India into a developed country.' A twenty-year-old
youth from Goa responded, 'Like an electron ceaselessly moving in its orbit, I
ceaselessly for my country, now onwards.'
With reference to the second point I had raised, a young man from Atlanta
wrote: 'When India becomes capable of imposing sanctions against any country,
if they are needed, then I will sing a song of India.' What the young man meant
was that economic strength brings prosperity accompanied by national strength.
The fifth answer is actually something that 30 per cent of the respondents said:
the need for greater transparency in various facets of our life. One crucial fact
often overlooked is that India has a population of 700 million people below the
age of thirty-five. These are 700 million people with the inclination, the ability
and the enthusiasm to take the nation to greatness. It is a very big force for
How can one ignite the young minds? How can one attract and involve the
young in the task of nation building? Only a united vision launched with
renewed vigour will bring the young force into action.
The subject of transparency and values
brings to my mind Gandhiji. I
happened to meet in Delhi his granddaughter, Sumitra Kulkarni. I asked her,
'Sumitraji, is there a particular incident (in respect of honesty in public life) that
you always remember from your grandfather's life?'
She narrated to me this story. 'Every day, as you all would have heard,
Mahatma Gandhi held a prayer meeting at a fixed time in the evening. After the
prayers there would be a collection of voluntary gifts for the welfare of harijans
and others. The devotees of Gandhiji used to collect whatever was given by the
people of all sections and this collection was counted by a few members
suggested by Gandhiji. The amount so collected would be informed to Gandhiji
before dinner. The next day, a man from the bank would come to collect the
'Once the man reported that there was a shortage of few paise in the money
handed over to him and the amount informed to Gandhiji the previous night.
Gandhiji, on hearing this, was so upset that he went on
fast saying that this is a
poor man's donation and we have no business to lose any of it.' This episode is a
unique example of transparency in public life. Well, in the same country we are
witnessing the best and the worst. We should all, particularly the young
generation, launch a movement for a transparent India, just as our fathers fought
for our freedom. Transparency is a cornerstone of development.
We have spoken about our progress since independence. We are self-sufficient
in agriculture, lead the world in milk production, have made enormous strides in
industrial development and so on. However, we are still a developing country,
As such, it is important to understand where we stand in terms of
competitiveness. A country's competitiveness is defined as 'the ability of a
national economy to achieve sustained high rates of economic growth'. By that
yardstick, according to the global competitiveness report prepared by the World
Economic Forum, Singapore is first,
the USA is second, Hong Kong is third,
Taiwan is fourth, Canada is fifth, the UK is eighth, France twenty-third,
Germany twenty-fifth and India fifty-ninth.
What decides world competitiveness? It is a combination of the
progressiveness of industry, the push for improved technology and the status of
governmental deregulation. In terms of overall GDP size, we are twelfth in the
world; in terms of per capita GDP we are fifty-seventh. Is this status acceptable
to us? Especially to the young? I believe we should work for fourth or fifth
position in terms of GDP as well as in respect of competitiveness. The target
year should be 2020 and we should aim for a higher position afterwards. We
have discussed some of the strategies and tools that can help us acquire the
To reiterate, a knowledge society can form the foundation for such a vision. I
am glad that the Planning Commission has taken a lead in generating a roadmap
for us to become such a society.
Where do we start? A number of new
states have been created recently and
these provide an excellent opportunity to begin. These states are poorly
developed in spite of their abundant natural resources. There is widespread
poverty though their people toil and sweat. What really prevents us from leaving
the beaten track and venturing upon a new path? The question is not who would
allow us but rather, who can stop us?
We need to adapt the implementation of our programmes and policies into a
mission mode to succeed. Progress cannot be swift and far-reaching if the path is
full of potholes. The abundant national resources, human and material, remain
to be fully utilized.

Building a New State
If I were to look over the whole world to find out the country most richly endowed with all the
wealth, power and beauty that nature can bestow - in some parts a very paradise on earth - I
should point to India.
- F. Max M ller
I began this book with my travel to Jharkhand state in the month of September
2001. That was my fourth visit. The first two visits brought me very close to the
core competence that this state possesses. I have
been made patron of the
Science and Technology Council of this state. My purpose on this visit was to
work out a developmental programme in the area of herbs, forest products and
other natural resources after meeting with the Chief Minister, Babu Lal Marandi,
the Minister for Science and Technology, Samaresh Singh, and concerned
officials. When I landed at Ranchi a group of boys and girls greeted me with lots
of flowers. I was quite moved by their regard for a simple scientist and their trust
in his dreams. I also met the Governor, Prabhat Kumar, who told me about the
hard-working nature of the people and the forest wealth of the state.
I recalled my earlier visit to the hill region about 75 km away from Ranchi.
Prof. Basu was spearheading a programme oriented towards children's education
and health. As I met the people of the hill region, young and old, in the village
complex, sitting like them on the ground, one thing was clear to me: my
presence here was ordained. The components for
development were all there-a
fertile area with good rainfall, tall trees and rich vegetation, and people who
were willing to work hard. Their faces were lit up with happiness so pure it is
rarely seen any more, in the cities at least. However their bodies looked tired,
showing signs of excess work for a bare livelihood.
On this visit, we made some headway in drawing up a viable plan for
developing a herbal drugs industry in the state. We discussed in detail with
various officials plans for herbal farms and marketing the herbs to drug
producers. Our purpose was that the drugs be manufactured within the state itself
so as to provide increased income to the state from value addition as also boost
industry there. This was a new experiment for the state and also for our mission,
but one that, given our experience in mission management, offers tremendous
scope for Jharkhand to enter into three areas in a big way-floriculture, herbs and
After the meeting we started for Bokaro, the steel city. The weather was
we wondered if the flight would be cancelled. We reached Ranchi
Airport at 2.30 in the afternoon. A Pawan Hans helicopter had been hired by the
state government. I asked the pilot whether we could fly in this weather. All
smiles, the pilot promised me a beautiful flight and so the helicopter took off,
with myself and two other passengers.
I have often flown in a helicopter but did find the weather particularly rough
on this occasion. However, the pilot was skilful and I even congratulated him at
one point for keeping the flight smooth in spite of the turbulence. It was a
marvellous experience as we flew over vast stretches of forest and hills and
streams. I was struck by the clean environment. I wondered whether this
precious natural wealth could be conserved from mindless destruction for short-
term business gains. With such thoughts in my mind, I noticed that we had
Suddenly I found the two pilots in agitated discussion regarding the falling
RPM count. I became alert myself. Looking down,
I could see a large number of
cars and people everywhere. Then the crash; the helicopter hit the ground with a
shattering sound. Broken parts flew around us and I could see fire engines rush
I simply got out of the helicopter that had hit the ground as a dead weight.
Fortunately the engine failed while we were quite close to the ground. Had it
failed moments earlier we could have perished under the impact of the free fall.
The pilots were in a state of shock and looked at me helplessly. I held their hands
and thanked them. I said, sometimes it happens with flying machines and as
pilots they have to face it with courage.
I had to address the Chinmaya Vidyalaya students and they would all be
waiting, so we rushed to the school leaving behind the crash and the shock. The
school's principal, Krishnaswami, received me and the students showered rose
petals as I walked to the dais through the auditorium. News of the crash had
preceded my arrival. The children sat in pindrop silence.
To ease the tension I told the young gathering, 'Friends, when I was travelling
from Ranchi to here, I admired God's great gift to the state. Under the ground
and above it, you have minerals in abundance. The rich soil of the Jharkhand
plains can give bountiful crops. When I was flying over the lovely forests and
the valleys and hills the thought of the wealth they hold in terms of forest and
herbal products was very reassuring. On the ground I saw a fully operational
steel plant. Now what I see in front of me and what the new state is famous for is
its industrious people. So this state has all the wealth needed. It is a land waiting
for a transformation to occur. I see in the future, villages that will be provided
with urban facilities and are self-contained in respect of education, health and
occupation. Today's incident will help define my remaining life's mission. I
forgot my inconvenience during the landing after seeing the state's wealth. How
can you use this core competence to become a developed state? For that you
have to work in the mission mode.'
At the time these children would be entering adult life and taking up careers,
they could be part of a national endeavour to becoming a knowledge society.
Their contribution to the state itself could be tremendous. That should be their
goal: to make Jharkhand great.
One thing that came to mind constantly as I went round the exhibition put up
by the children and watched their performances- including a marvellous peacock
dance-was how important it was to improve the education system so that it did
not stifle these powerhouses of creativity. I felt this is one area I must work upon
with the state and the Centre.
I continued with my other engagements after the function at the Chinmaya
Vidyalaya. There was a meeting due at the town hall and I went there, brushing
aside the concern of the doctors thoughtfully sent by the General Manager of the
Bokaro Steel Plant to look after my well-being. At the town hall the subject I had
to speak on was 'Jharkhand's Core Competence and
Industries'. I kept my
speech short, preferring to let a discussion develop.
Meanwhile, the electronic media had done its job! As there was a strong
media presence to cover our arrival, news of the crash travelled quickly
throughout the country. I started receiving calls on my mobile phone to find out
whether I was all right. I did not want to disturb the meeting and gave the mobile
phone to Dr Vijayaraghavan, who by then had reached by road from Ranchi. I
asked him to call my elder brother in Rameswaram, who is eighty- six years old,
and tell him I was fine. The other call I asked him to make was to my personal
secretary Sheridon to handle the calls that would come in.
As I was giving my talk Dr Vijayaraghavan passed a note to me. 'Your brother
is not convinced that you are OK. If you are OK he has to hear your voice.' An
elder brother remains elder all your life! I interrupted my speech to reassure my
To come back to the discussion at the town hall meeting, I was asked a very
pertinent question from the audience. 'Dr Kalam,' the questioner said, 'could
you please tell me why is raw material exported from many ports specially
designed for this purpose?' This was specially relevant to Jharkhand with its
huge storehouse of mineral wealth. In answer, I narrated a conversation I had in
Goa. I was on a boat crossing the harbour, on my way to the university for a
convocation address, and accompanying me was Dr Jose Paul, Chairman of the
Mormugao Port Trust. We started discussing iron ore exports to Japan, much of
which take place from Panjim. He told me, 30 million tonnes of iron ore is
exported annually from the four ports; of this 17 million tonnes is exported from
Mormugao alone. The ore is sold at rather a low price-a few dollars a tonne-as,
according to the buyers, it is of inferior quality. As such, its sale did not
contribute anything much to the economy. The same ore, utilized here, would, of
course, generate far more income because of value addition.
'What is value addition and could you
give an example?' I was asked in
Bokaro and a powerful example came to my mind. When we were working on
the satellite launch vehicles in the 1970s, a requirement arose for beryllium
diaphragms. These are used in gyros, sensors used to determine the attitude (the
position of an aircraft in relation to specified directions) of the rockets or
missiles when they are in flight. As these were not available with us, a
procurement team was formed to purchase them in the international market. The
team was headed by T.N. Seshan, better known now as the former Chief Election
Commissioner of India, with Madhavan Nair, Dr S.C. Gupta and I as members.
We struck a deal with a company in New York for a hundred beryllium
Three months later, we got a message from the company that since beryllium
diaphragms are used to make gyros mounted on intercontinental ballistic
missiles, they did not have permission from the State Department to supply them
to India. We immediately initiated action to redress the problem in our typical
fire-fighting manner. Technology denied was, to us, technology gained.
Meanwhile, it emerged that India has one of the largest deposits of beryllium
ore. The ore was exported in those days to Japan, who processed the ore into
beryllium rods and sheets and exported them to US companies to transform them
into beryllium products such as diaphragms! I received the shock of my life: this
was material mined in India and exported to Japan, who processed it and
exported it to the US, and the US company refused to give it to India. Where was
our sense of initiative? What had happened to our aims? The issue figured
prominently in the press and export of beryllium ore was stopped.
The same story is repeated in other areas. The upshot is that India is poor as a
nation in spite of its enormous wealth because it does not focus on value
addition, be it in mineral or biodiversity products or even grain or fish. In the
case of beryllium ore, value addition by at least ten times takes place in
refinement itself. Value addition by at least 100 times is achieved during product
conversion. And this is what we would be
paying Japan or the US, for something
that originated from India itself. It is the same with iron ore, and many other
exports; only the scale of value addition varies. It is a lesson that must be quickly
At the same meeting, another interesting question came up. 'Do you think in
politics, purity is possible?' It was a little outside my purview but there was one
aspect to it, raised earlier, which I would like to mention. This aspect is that an
entire generation of people representing excellence in all fields-politics,
industry, sciences, the arts-emerged in the years leading to independence.
Mahatma Gandhi, C.V. Raman, J.R.D. Tata, Pirojsha B. Godrej, Laxmanrao
Kirloskar, Ramakrishna Bajaj, Rabindranath Tagore, Dr S. Radhakrishnan,
Madan Mohan Malviya it is a long list. Suddenly there was excellence in
every sphere of society and the circumstance making such flowering possible
was the vision that the nation had set for itself.
I believe if the nation forms a second vision today, leaders of a stature to suit
our ambition will appear once again, in all walks
of life, including politics.
The next day, I travelled to Bokaro Steel Plant, the largest steel plant in India.
The General Manager of the plant, Mr Tiwari, accompanied me. The scale of the
plant was breathtaking. I saw hundreds of men working in an organized way as
the sweat poured off their bodies, while the molten steel flowed from the furnace
like a river on fire. The iron ore would be available for years, I was told.
Impressive as the plant was I was disappointed to see that there were no
industrial estates around it, utilizing the steel produced here to make various
products. I was told that setting up of industrial estates came under state purview.
It brought back my old regret at our compartmentalized thinking. Why this
fragmented governance where one agency is alienated from another? Unless
development is directed towards state- based industries, working on huge
national missions through centralized planning will not do much for real
On the flight back to Delhi, I wondered how Jharkhand could best be helped.
was needed were a few major missions to transform the state and a time-
frame. The state and the Centre would need to make an integrated effort. Would
Let me go back to my experience in the SLV-3 missile and weapons
development programmes. They illustrate what I mean by an integrated
approach. To succeed in these efforts, we had to adopt a multi- organizational
mission mode. Building a rocket is a long process from the drawing board to
development and launch. All through the process, a number of reliability factors
matter. The first stage is a robust booster rocket system. Before Rohini was put
into orbit, the booster rocket had gone through five static trials in the flight
hardware in full scale, and it had also been tried out during two experimental
flights. That means a proven, developed booster was available when the time
An IRBM was not demanded by anyone when the missile programme was
conceived in 1982. However, the availability of the SLV-3 booster led to the
technology demonstrator-Agni-as part of the approved
programme. Agni was launched successfully in 1989 at a moderate budget of Rs
36 crore! Nobody in the world could have anticipated India acquiring IRBM
capability in the short period of six years. It happened only because the Agni
mission was organized into a multi-institutional programme.
My assessment based on various space and defence projects done as mission
mode programmes is that intensive partnership between various participants-
government departments, industry, research institutions- brings faster
development at lower cost. The same holds in other projects and schemes.
Central and state projects integrated as mission mode operations will bring rapid
development at minimum cost.
What is keeping us from taking this concept further? Does it sound risky to
abandon the time-tested route of checks and balances and go in for a tightrope
walk? Or is it that going into mission mode would demand a responsibility:
Either one has to
show the result or quit?
In October 2001, I got the opportunity to visit Guru Gobind Singh
Indraprastha University in Delhi. The topic I selected for my address to the
students was 'Responsible Young Citizens'. I put forth the importance of India
becoming a knowledge society. After the talk, one student asked me an
important question, 'Could you tell me why Indians, particularly educated
Indians, excel when they go to the USA and Europe? They become rich also.'
I said, 'Recently, I read a book-
The Horse that Flew
which is about Indians who have succeeded in the IT field, especially in
America. One quality I noticed in all of those who excelled was that they did not
work solo. They worked with their colleagues, irrespective of religious or other
differences, and they were not afraid to take risks, starting with the risk of going
to a foreign land.'
I met B. Chandrasekhar, who has been a big success as an entrepreneur in
Silicon Valley, when he contributed to our alma
mater, Madras Institute of
Technology (whose acronym, MIT, is the same as that of the famous institute at
Massachusetts) to start an Internet Technology Centre. One fine morning
Chandrasekhar sold his 10- billion-dollar company to start another enterprise.
When I asked him how he took such chances to build his enterprise,
Chandrasekhar told me he loved taking risks. There was one other aspect to the
success of his and other companies. For them survival depended on
performance. And the better they performed, the richer they became.
I have an experience to tell in this regard. It was 1955. I was in the second
year of my course in Aeronautical Engineering in Madras Institute of
Technology. Our Director was Dr N. Srinivasan, an aeronautical engineer
himself. I was working on a project surpervised by him on designing a low-level
attack aircraft. A seven-member student team was allotted this task. Three of
them- Vivekanandan, Mahabaleshwar Bhat and I- were given the task of system
integration. Our team was supposed to provide the design
report with all the
drawings in three months' time. Because data on the engine, control system and
some other sub-system drawings coming from my friends got delayed, I also got
delayed by more than two weeks in submitting my drawings.
It was a humid evening in the month of August. I was working on the drawing
board. Dr Srinivasan, on his way to the tennis court, peeped into my room and
looked at my work. He realized that I was nowhere near completion. He said,
'Kalam, if you do not complete it in three days' time your scholarship will be
That was a big jolt for me. The scholarship was my lifeline, as my father
could not afford the high cost of education at MIT. I had to make the best use of
the time available. Three days was too short a time to complete it. I would have
to work continuously. And this is what I decided to do. I slept on a bench in the
college for three nights and went out only for food.
Exactly after three days, Dr Srinivasan visited my drawing board. He spent
one hour examining what I had done and said, 'This is good. You have
performed a few weeks' work in a few days.' Coming from him, it was a great
I realized then that if something is at stake, the human mind gets ignited and
working capacity gets enhanced manifold. Challenges throw up opportunities.
Once one selects a task, one should get immersed in it. Either you will succeed
or fail; that risk will always be there. This should not deter you. When you fail,
you still have the experience gained to draw upon in the future.
Start by risking your own position for a mission. Either I deliver or I go.
Prepare yourself for the endeavour. With effort and perseverance you will
succeed. There is always a risk involved when we venture into something new.
After all, the process of birth itself is a risky affair. But then the infant starts
breathing and life follows, with all its hopes and aspirations. Breathe in
thoughts of success and you will be a success.
The way to development is through purposeful activity. The young especially
have to be guided properly, so that their lives find a proper direction and their
creativity is allowed to flower. To facilitate this, certain educational reforms
With regard to improving the pace of development, Centre-state efforts should
be coordinated in a few key areas and efforts across sectors and organizations
integrated and taken up in a mission mode. The mindset must change, showing
willingness to take pragmatic risks. Success will follow.

Where the mind is without fear and the head is held high

Where knowledge is free

Where the world has not been broken up into fragments .

My Father, let my country awake.
All through this book I have spoken about the power of the imagination. It lies at
the heart of the creative process and is the very substance of life, allied as it is to
to attract to us what we most desire. This power makes all the
difference between the winners and the losers. I would like to see in twenty years
a literate and poverty-free India. I dream of an India governed by noble leaders. I
dream of a system where the work of scientists and technologists is focussed on
specific missions driven by goals relevant to the common man. How is this
dream to be made real?
We need to realize that missions are always bigger than organizations, just as
organizations are always bigger than the individuals who run them. Missions
need effort and the mind provides the purpose. Seen this way, consider, which
department or ministry will take man to Mars and build a habitat there? Can
200,000 MW of electric power be generated by isolated efforts in thermal,
hydroelectric, nuclear and non- conventional sectors without an integrated
effort? Can the second green revolution happen without agricultural scientists,
bio- technologists and irrigation experts working together? Without proper
in clinics and affordable drugs reaching our masses, our
biotechnology laboratories and medical councils will continue to perpetuate each
other's survival without serving the purpose of their existence: to set in place the
most advanced medical facilities and make these available to the people at
I have dwelt upon my own experiences that made me aware of the energy
field which is created by a vision. It is a power that arises from deep within you.
This power is the basis for the movement towards excellence we saw at the time
of independence. I have been touched by this power on many occasions while
facing a challenge. Pre-independence India reverberated with it. It helped us
humble a mighty empire.
Jamshedji Nusserwanji Tata brought the steel industry to India even though
the British rulers were not favourably disposed to the idea. Acharya P.C. Ray
nurtured the chemical and pharmaceutical industries. We saw the birth of many
great institutions like the
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, started by J.N.
Tata, the Banaras Hindu University established by Pandit Madan Mohan
Malaviya, and Aligarh Muslim University set up by Sir Syed Ahmad Khan.
Some of the progressive maharajas too set up universities, as in Baroda. There
are many examples. In all these cases, the motivation was to see India come up
in the world, to demonstrate that 'India can do it'.
Are we in a position to continue that work, revive that spirit of enterprise?
Shall we ever see cars designed and manufactured in India dotting the roads in
Frankfurt or Seoul? Or Indian satellite launch vehicles place communication,
weather and remote sensing satellites of other nations in orbit? Or see India build
power stations for the USA, Japan and China? The possibility will remain
remote if we stay with the present trend of low aim.
Today we are witnessing good progress in the software sector but almost all of
the hardware is imported. Can we rise higher on the value scale there? Can India
operating system that will become a household name in the world of
computers? Our exports consist to a large extent of low- value raw material such
as iron ore and alumina. Can we not convert these into a wide range of products
that find an international market? We have hundreds of defence production
industries but why does India not manufacture and market the Main Battle Tank,
missiles, aircraft, guns and other defence equipment? We have the most
important core competence in the form of our multifaceted manpower and basic
infrastructure. What is that we don't have?
Let us think what prevents us in undertaking such challenges. We have to
analyse how we can give a new dimension to our style of functioning, by cutting
across the individual interests of various ministries and even industries and
institutions, to follow an integrated action plan. The motive force has to be love
for the country. We need a vision that is shared by the entire nation.
In the drive for development, some states are faring better than others in the
Bright young entrepreneurs have energized the national technology
scene. Bangalore, Chennai, Mumbai, Delhi and Hyderabad are hubs of business
activity. But even though the IT sector is a very visible area of success and has
brought in some capital investment, in terms of overall development this is not
enough. Even if you take up the IT area as a mission, manpower is the most
important need. Those living away from the cities must also have access to a
good education to join the talent pool. And this should happen fast.
My visits to the northeastern states- Tripura and Assam-and to Jharkhand
showed me our untapped potential. Tripura's economy rests on forest products,
including bamboo cultivation. It is rich in mineral wealth, as also in natural gas.
But the transport facilities are in bad shape. It is difficult to travel, interact and
organize business. There is isolation. In Jharkhand too there is mineral wealth
besides its resources in terms of forestry products and handicrafts, all of which
need to be developed. In Assam, there is no shortage of
resources and the state
has good educational infrastructure. All the ingredients required for a developed
economy are there but there is insurgency and unrest among people. A focussed
mission will integrate people.
States such as Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Punjab and Karnataka have made
me realize that much can be achieved once efforts are made to channel
development funds for improvement in areas such as education and health.
These and other states can become good examples of economic development.
Our intellectual forums, political platforms, academic institutions and
chambers of commerce are full of discussion and debate. There is noise, a lot of
it in fact. There are endless debates, arguments, hypotheses, and theories, and yet
there is little progress. However, the theme of a developed India is not discussed
in board rooms and technology conferences. I want all of us-institutions,
political parties, industries, communities, families, individuals-at every level to
responsibility for what is good or bad in our situation, for what we
possess and that which we do not. This would mean that we stop blaming others
for the circumstances we find ourselves in. Taking responsibility also means a
willingness to exercise our abilities to the fullest. This will make us worthy of
enjoying the benefits that come with effort.
What I have tried to tell you in this book is that we must be aware of our
higher self and view ourselves as citizens of a developed nation. We are a great
civilization and each one of us born here must trust in the wisdom of this
civilization. Our scriptures tell us that there is no barrier between us and the
world, that we are the world just as the world is in us. It is for you to put yourself
in tune with the music of the universe.
There are a few points I would like to mention.
The needs of a nation's people are bigger and much more important than any
other considerations. The mission of Parliament is that it has to be alive and
dynamic over issues vital to the existence of our very
did not come as a gift. The whole country struggled for decades to achieve the
first vision of independence, so we have to protect it. There were excellent
leaders in all walks of life-science, education and industry. To preserve this
freedom from intruders and others who would compromise it is our bounden
duty and not a matter of choice and convenience. No ideology is above the
security and prosperity of our country. No agenda is more important than
harmony among the people.
Students should get ready to transform India into a developed nation. Ignite
your minds and think big.
A teacher once said, 'Give me a five-year-old child. After seven years, no God
or Devil will be able to change the child.' Will all teachers be such gurus?
The administrators have a great opportunity to link the people and political
leaders. They should always take decisions that are good for the people. I believe
it is only executives like empowered district collectors who can assist
state-Central integrated fund has to be deployed in mission
Fifty years after independence, the results of scientific effort have not reached
the people to the extent required. It is time the advances in science and
technology are deployed in a big way to transform rural life.
Global competition is on, be it WTO, competition from multinationals or
China. For industrialists, competing with high- performance and cost-effective
products will result in growth for the industry. Competitiveness and innovation
are the two pillars of industrial growth. Industries by working together can
generate multinational institutions, reversing the present trend.
The IT community, by its innovativeness has given India stature in the world.
India is a competitive nation in IT today. IT must be used for healthcare,
telemedicine, to remove illiteracy, generate skills and for e-governance and tele-
education. Transform the nation into a knowledge society with IT as the linking
Finally, the farmers have given this
country surplus food with their sweat.
Time has come for two events to take place in agriculture sector. One, the value
addition of all agriculture products. The second is to improve the quality of
agriculture products and compete in the world market. Above all marketing itself
is a great business tool; we have to create a new cadre for this purpose. These
steps will bring relief to the farmers.
And to God the Almighty! Make my people sweat. Let their toil create many
more Agnis that can annihilate evil. Let my country prosper in peace. Let my
people live in harmony. Let me go to dust as a proud citizen of India, to rise
again and rejoice in its glory.
I was thinking what can summarize the book aptly. I recall reading a story on the
Internet about a conversation between two babies-Ego and Spirit-while in the
Spirit says to Ego, 'I know you are going to find this hard to accept, but I
believe there is life after birth.'
Ego responds, 'Don't be foolish. Look around you. This is all there is. Why
must you always be thinking about something beyond this reality? Accept your
Spirit quietens down for a while, but not for long. 'Ego, now don't get angry,
but I also believe that there is a Mother.'
'A Mother!' Ego laughs. 'How can you
say that? You've never seen a Mother,
you don't know what Mother is. Why can't you accept that this is all there is?
You are here alone with me. This is your reality.'
'Ego,' Spirit begs, 'please listen. What about those constant pressures we both
feel, those movements that make us so uncomfortable sometimes, the feeling
that we are being squeezed in as we grow? I think we shall soon have a new life,
that we shall see light.'
Ego replies, 'You have never seen light. How do you know what it is? These
pressures and darkness is what life is about.'
Spirit tries not to bother Ego again but cannot resist one last try. 'Ego,' she
says, 'I will not bother you again. But I do believe that after all this discomfort
not only shall we see light but also experience the bliss of meeting Mother.'
Ego's reply is, of course, that Spirit is truly mad.
What I want to tell the people of my country through this book is that they
must never be content with that which has been
presented to them in the last fifty
years since our independence. When I was on the verge of completing this book,
somebody raised a very important point with me. While addressing 1,500
students at Presidency College, Chennai, on the theme 'Nation Has to Have
Vision', a series of questions came from the students on national development,
political leadership, science and technology's contribution, education and the
learning process and so on. After the session, coming out of the auditorium, a
visibly happy gathering of students was trying to reach me to shake hands. While
I was manoeuvring to leave, suddenly one young student pushed through the
crowd and thrust a crumpled paper in my hand. I put it in my pocket and read it
in the car. My mind got elevated with the power of the message from T.
Saravanan doing M.Phil Zoology at Presidency College. I would like to share it
with all of you.
'The full power of a banyan tree is equal
to the power in the seeds of the tree. In a way both of
us, you and me, are the same. But we exhibit our talents in different forms. A few of the seeds
directly flourish as banyan trees and many seeds die. Sometimes, the seeds, due to certain
circumstances and environmental conditions, get damaged and become part of the soil as
manure, making the next generation stronger and more powerful, thus exhibiting its aim of
'You have worked for the country and helped many scientists, engineers and knowledge
workers. Can you tell me how you ensured that their abilities were not wasted or their growth
was not stunted prematurely as some of the seed? In this service, what is the percentage of
success you can claim?'
My reply the same day said:
'I have read and re-read your powerful message and question many times. I spent twenty years
in ISRO and twenty years in DRDO making rockets, launch vehicles and
missiles. I have seen
many successes and also a few failures. I have worked with many scientists, engineers and
technicians as united teams to achieve goals in a short time. The combined power of the team
has seen those successes and learnt from the failures. I could see some of my team members
excelling me in knowledge and deed. This gave me immense happiness.'
Saravanan's message gives all of us a tremendous responsibility. Leaders must
ensure that the younger generation is better than them and not subject them to
circumstances that will stunt their growth. Above all, protection of the young
from failures in scientific developments and constant encouragement are
essential to ensure that scientists, technologists or those working in any field
grow and work for the nation.
I would like to conclude this book with an answer to one last question, asked
of me on Id. The question was: What prayer did you say on this occasion?
I replied, apart from praying for the
health and happiness of my teachers,
friends and relatives, I said this prayer:
'O Almighty, create thoughts and actions in the minds of the people of my nation so that they
Help all religious leaders of my country give strength to the people to combat the forces of
Embed the thought "Nation is bigger than the Individual" in the minds of the leaders and people.
O God bless my people to work and transform the country into a prosperous nation soon.'
I have conveyed the message overleaf to nearly 40,000 school children in
Chennai, Porbandar, Rajkot, Jamshedpur,Bhubaneshwar, Dindigul, Abu Road,
Anand, Udaipur and many other places so far. I hope to reach 100,000 young
minds before August 2003. When thousands recite this, I see the developed
ME AND MY NATION-INDIA
As a young citizen of India,
armed with technology, knowledge and love for my nation,
I realize, small aim is a crime.
I will work and sweat for a great vision,
the vision of transforming India into a developed nation
powered by economic strength with value system.
I am one of the citizens of a billion,
only the vision will ignite the billion souls.
It has entered into me,
the ignited soul compared to any resource,
is the most powerful resource
on the earth, above the earth and under the earth.
I will keep the lamp of knowledge burning
to achieve the vision - Developed India.
Wings of Fire: An Autobiography
, A.P.J. Abdul Kalam with Arun Tiwari. Universities Press (India) Pvt.
India 2020: A Vision for the New Millennium
, A.P.J. Abdul Kalam and Y.S. Rajan. Viking, 1998.
Light from Many Lamps,
Lillian Eichler Watson. Fireside, 1988.
Chandra: A Biography of S. Chandrasekhar,
Kameshwar C. Wali. University of Chicago Press, 1992.
The Horse That Flew,
Chidanand Rajghatta. HarperCollins India, 2001.
Empires of the Mind,
Denis Waitley. Nicholas Brealey Publishing, 1995.
Dr Verghese Kurien. Tata McGraw Hill, 1997.
Dr Wayne W. Dyer. HarperCollins, 1997.
Edward O. Wilson. Vintage Books, 1999.
India as Knowledge Superpower,
Task Force Report to Planning Commission, 2001.
, TIFAC Task Force Reports, 1996.
14. 'A New Knowledge Society', Dr A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, 2000.
15. Report on 'Rurbanization', Prof. P.V. Indiresan, 2000.
I have listed some of the books that were useful to me in the writing of this book.
I would like to mention three books whose ideas I found specially relevant to my
Chandra: A Biography of S. Chandrasekhar
C. Wali, Penguin Books;
Empires of the Mind
by Denis Waitley, Nicholas
by Dr Wayne W. Dyer,
HarperCollins. Some of Dr Dyer's ideas on individual achievement I found
useful in addressing the theme of a nation's awakening to its potential. The other
books that I consulted are listed in the references.
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Books India Pvt. Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi 110 017, India

Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, M4P 2Y3, Canada (a
division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd)
Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of
Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd)
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, Auckland 0632, New Zealand (a division of Pearson New
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, Block D, Rosebank Office Park, 181 Jan Smuts Avenue, Parktown
North, Gauteng 2193, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
First published in Viking by Penguin Books India 2002
Published in Penguin Books 2003
Copyright A.P.J. Abdul Kalam 2002
Cover Photograph by Gurinder Osan/indiapicture
This digital edition published in 2012.
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired
out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior written consent in any form of binding or cover
other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition being
imposed on the subsequent purchaser and without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no
part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recordingor otherwise), without the prior
written permission of both the copyright owner and the above-mentioned publisher of this book.

Vision for a Developed and Prosperous India by 2020
Check more about India 2020 Summary
Listen India 2020 Audiobook
"India 2020: A Vision for the New Millennium" by A.P.J.
Abdul Kalam, co-authored with Y.S. Rajan, is a compelling
blueprint for transforming India into a developed nation by the
year 2020. Through the lens of a revered
scientist-turned-statesman, the book offers a holistic and
pragmatic roadmap that transcends mere economic growth to
encompass human development, technological innovation, and
sustainable practices. It delves into the untapped potential of
India's natural resources, the prowess of its youth, and the
unyielding spirit of its citizens. With strategic insights and
actionable recommendations, the narrative implores every
Indian to take an active role in the nation-building process.
Engaged readers will find themselves inspired by the vision of
a vibrant, prosperous, and equitable India, urging them to
contribute to this grand, collective mission.
A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, also known as the "Missile Man of
India," was an esteemed Indian aerospace scientist and the
11th President of India, serving from 2002 to 2007. Born on
October 15, 1931, in Rameswaram, Tamil Nadu, Kalam rose
from humble beginnings to become a leading figure in India's
space and missile development programs, particularly through
his work with the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO)
and the Defence Research and Development Organisation
(DRDO). Renowned for his pivotal role in India's civilian
space program and military missile systems, he was
instrumental in the successful Pokhran-II nuclear tests in 1998,
which established India as a nuclear power. Beyond his
scientific achievements, Kalam was a beloved educator and
author, inspiring millions through his writings and speeches,
emphasizing the importance of dreaming big, education, and
national development. His book "India 2020" reflects his
vision and aspirations for India's progress, aiming to transform
the nation into a developed country by the year 2020.
Scan to DownloadSummary Content List
: Can India Become a Developed Country?
: What other countries Envision for Themselves
: Evolution of Technology Vision 2020
: Food, Agriculture and Processing
: Materials and the Future
: Chemicals Industries and Our Biological Wealth
: Manufacturing for the future
: Services As People's Wealth
: Health Care for All
: The Enabling Infrastructure
: Realizing the Vision
Scan to DownloadChapter 1 Summary : Can India Become
Can India Become a
Developed Country?This section explores India's potential for development by analyzing indicators like wealth, citizen
prosperity, and global standing while emphasizing the limitations of traditional economic metrics.
IndicatorsKey parameters such as nutrition, life expectancy, and education are discussed, invoking Gandhi's
principle of alleviating poverty and emphasizing the upliftment of the poorest.
DevelopmentThe author reflects on the shift from post-independence optimism to current cynicism, stressing
that developed status must include the well-being of all citizens.
Strategic StrengthsIndia's need to leverage technological competencies for economic growth and national security is
highlighted, focusing on self-reliance in technology and defense.
2020Kalam outlines a "Technology Vision" aimed at achieving significant GDP growth by 2020 while
recognizing potential risks from regional economic turmoil and global competition.
Role of Education and
Human ResourcesPlans for enhancing social and economic opportunities through education and skill development
are discussed, promoting literacy and urban-rural integration for prosperity.
DynamicsBeing aware of economic warfare tactics from developed nations, Kalam emphasizes the need for
India to develop its technologies while fostering positive global engagement.
2020The chapter concludes by envisioning continued progress beyond 2020 through technological and
social advancements, reinforcing the need for strong leadership and collective action.
Can India Become a Developed Country?
Scan to DownloadThis chapter explores the fundamental question of India's
potential to evolve into a developed nation. Key indicators of
development, such as the wealth of the nation, prosperity of
its citizens, and global standing, are analyzed. Traditional
economic metrics like GNP, GDP, and per capita income are
noted, but the chapter emphasizes that such numbers can
mask human suffering and inequality.
Several parameters are mentioned to assess the well-being of
people, including nutrition, life expectancy, sanitation,
healthcare access, and education. The chapter invokes
Gandhi's principle that true development must alleviate
poverty and erase the tears of the downtrodden, suggesting
that uplifting the poorest remains an essential goal.
The author reflects on the initial post-independence optimism
versus current cynicism regarding India's ability to become a
developed nation. Notably, it is emphasized that achieving
developed status must not come at the expense of the
Scan to Downloadupliftment of all citizens.
Technological Imperatives and Strategic Strengths
A forward-looking analysis suggests that India must leverage
its technological competencies to secure economic
advancement and national security. The importance of
self-reliance in defense and technological areas is highlighted
as critical for India to navigate complex global challenges.
Economic Vision for 2020
Kalam outlines a "Technology Vision" integrated with
economic and social dimensions aiming for significant GDP
growth. Projections for India's GDP, per capita income,
income distribution, and poverty levels are made for 2020,
while recognizing potential pitfalls due to economic turmoil
in Southeast Asia and evolving global competition.
Role of Education and Human Resources
The text discusses plans to strengthen social and economic
opportunities through education, health care, and skill
development. It asserts that improvements in literacy and
Scan to Downloadurban-rural integration will cultivate a more prosperous
Responding to Global Dynamics
Kalam warns about selective economic warfare tactics from
developed countries aiming to suppress emerging economies
like India. The necessity for India to develop its own
technologies while engaging positively with the world is
The chapter concludes with a vision for continued progress
past 2020, focusing on technological advancements,
economic strength, social equity, and strategic foresight. It
calls for strong leadership and collective action from the
nation's citizens to meet these challenges head-on.
Key Point :The importance of uplifting the poorest
citizens in the journey towards becoming a developed
Example:Imagine walking through your local
community, observing neighborhoods where families
struggle to afford basic necessities while others thrive.
This stark contrast prompts you to think how crucial it is
for India's journey towards development to prioritize
uplifting the poorest citizens. As you engage in
discussions with friends or family, the realization dawns
that numbers like GDP and per capita income don't
reveal the true story of prosperity. Instead, the essence
of development lies in ensuring that every individual,
regardless of their circumstances, has access to essential
services like healthcare and education, reflecting the
legacy of Gandhi's vision. Thus, your commitment to
supporting initiatives that promote social equity aligns
with the core belief that for India to truly advance, it
must elevate the lives of its most vulnerable people.
Scan to DownloadCritical Thinking
Key Point :The disparity between economic metrics
Critical Interpretation :Kalam's assertion that true
development encompasses more than mere GDP growth
challenges readers to question the adequacy of
traditional economic indicators in measuring a nation's
progress. While GDP may reflect economic activity, it
often fails to account for inequality and overall quality
of life. Critics argue that focusing solely on economic
growth can exacerbate disparities and leave vulnerable
populations behind, as shown in studies on income
inequality (Piketty, 'Capital in the Twenty-First
Century') or the limitations of GDP as a measure of
welfare (Stiglitz, Sen, and Fitoussi Report). Readers
should consider whether Kalam's perspective adequately
addresses the multifaceted nature of development, rather
than merely advocating for economic metrics.
Scan to DownloadChapter 2 Summary : What other
countries Envision for Themselves
: What Other Countries Envision for
The chapter opens with a quote from the Buddha
emphasizing critical thinking and self-analysis over blind
acceptance of ideas from authority figures. A.P.J. Abdul
Kalam asserts that India has yet to carve its own path and
often imitates the success of other nations, losing faith in its
Scan to DownloadHistorical Context and Perception
Kalam reflects on India's historical contributions to
technology and culture, noting that despite significant
achievements, many Indians have developed a defeatist
attitude, believing they cannot excel in their own
innovations. He stresses the importance of recognizing
India's past inventors and contributing to a belief in domestic
Learning from Global Visions
Kalam points out that while it is beneficial to learn from
others, India must create its own vision. Observing how other
countries like the USA, Europe, Malaysia, China, Japan,
Korea, and Israel have framed strategic visions can offer
The USA and Europe
The United States, a major industrial and military power,
developed its strength through ingenuity and an
entrepreneurial spirit. Historical figures like Edison and Ford
Scan to Downloadexemplify the American commitment to long-term goals. The
emphasis is on technology as a driver for economic growth
and national strength. In contrast, no coherent long-term
vision was found in the UK until recent governmental
initiatives. Other European nations like Germany and France
have taken steps to developed technological capabilities, also
aligning their visions with market needs.
Malaysia has made significant strides economically by
adopting a strategic master plan for becoming a fully
developed nation by 2020. Under Prime Minister Mahathir
Mohammed, Malaysia's focus encompasses balanced
development across various sectors, emphasizing local
design capabilities and green policies.
China aims to align itself with developed nations by
promoting science and technology as central to its
productivity. By 2020, it aims to bridge technological gaps in
major industries and improve agricultural capabilities using
Scan to DownloadJapan's Technological Leadership
Japan exemplifies an organized long-term vision, having
transformed its economy through diligent investment in
technology and innovation. The country moved from being a
net importer of technology to becoming a leading exporter,
focusing on continuous improvement and upgrades in
Once regarded as a poor nation, South Korea radically
improved its economic status by embracing modern
technologies in sectors including electronics and automotive
industries. Focused investment in research and development
allowed South Koreans to build formidable multinational
Israel's Agricultural and Military Innovations
Israel emerged as a technological powerhouse despite its
geographical challenges. By prioritizing water and food
security, alongside defense capabilities, Israel developed
Scan to Downloadadvanced agricultural techniques and military technologies.
Kalam emphasizes that India is not alone in envisioning a
future. Numerous countries are strategically thinking about
technological advancements in various domains. The vision
for India, shaped by its unique context and strengths, aspires
to lift millions out of poverty and emerge as a developed
Key Point :The necessity for India to develop its own
Example:Imagine standing at a crossroads, observing
others confidently charting their paths: the USA
revolutionizing technology, China modernizing
agriculture, and Malaysia pursuing balanced growth. As
you ponder your own future, you realize that emulating
these successes isn't enough; India needs to harness its
unique strengths and creative innovations. Reflecting on
the rich tapestry of India's historical achievements, you
start to feel a spark of determination. The time has come
for you to envision a future that not only follows
footsteps but also creates your own path towards
becoming a thriving, developed nation.
Scan to DownloadCritical Thinking
Key Point :The importance of cultivating a distinct
national vision based on self-reliance and innovation.
Critical Interpretation :Kalam's assertion that India
should stop mirroring the successes of other nations
emphasizes the need for a unique vision that leverages
India's historical strengths in technology and culture.
However, it is important to critically assess whether this
perspective adequately acknowledges the complexities
of global interdependence and the value of adapting
successful strategies from others, rather than solely
relying on a purely indigenous approach. While a
nationalistic view can foster innovation, it may also
overlook the beneficial aspects of collaboration and
learning from global precedents, which can enhance
India's growth trajectory (Hossain, M.
Key Point :The pitfalls of viewing history through a
Critical Interpretation :Kalam highlights the defeatist
attitude prevalent in Indian society, arguing it limits
creativity and self-belief. However, this viewpoint could
be contested by recognizing that such attitudes may
stem from socio-economic realities and historical
contexts that shape perceptions of capability. It may be
beneficial to explore the nuanced reasons behind this
mindset instead of attributing it solely to a lack of faith
Scan to DownloadChapter 3 Summary : Evolution of
CompetenciesThe pre-Independence leaders envisioned a modern nation. Post-independence, India made significant
progress in various sectors, but later became reliant on foreign technology. This prompted the creation of
TIFAC in 1988 to promote self-reliance in technology.
Vision 2020In 1993, TIFAC aimed to transition India from a developing to a developed nation through technology,
emphasizing its role in transforming education, agriculture, and infrastructure, and led to the formation of
task forces for implementation.
CompetenciesIndia's urgent needs include poverty eradication, health and education for all, employment, and national
security self-reliance. Core competencies, defined as inherent strengths, allow superior results despite
disparities, with an emphasis on enhancing skills and entrepreneurship.
Resource BaseIndia has a diverse natural resource base with minerals and biodiversity that can be harnessed for growth,
complemented by the utilization of human capital.
MethodologyTIFAC conducted a comprehensive assessment with over 5,000 participants to identify key sectors for
advancement, leading to reports that guide policy and technological strategies, culminating in the 1996
ReleasePost-release, authors promoted the findings to encourage collaboration among stakeholders, aiming to inspire
collective efforts for India's transition to a developed nation.
Evolution of Technology Vision 2020
Scan to DownloadIndia's Core Competencies

The pre-Independence era in India was marked by visionary
leaders who aspired for a robust and modern nation. After
gaining independence, India achieved progress across various
sectors, including agriculture, healthcare, and education,
defying expectations of chaos. However, over time, a shift
towards dependency on foreign technology emerged, raising
doubts about self-reliance. This led to the establishment of
the Technology Information, Forecasting and Assessment
Council (TIFAC) in 1988, aimed at forecasting emerging
technologies for national development.

In November 1993, the TIFAC governing council deliberated
on transforming India's status from a developing nation to a
developed one, emphasizing technology as a pivotal wealth
generator. The discussions emphasized that technology could
revolutionize education, agriculture, and infrastructure,
leading to the formation of task forces and panels dedicated
to realizing this vision.
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Scan to DownloadChapter 4 Summary : Food, Agriculture
Processing4% of India's population lives below the poverty line. Significant progress has been made
since the 1960s dependency on American wheat imports.
The Crisis and Indian Food
SecurityThe mid-1960s crisis led to a focus on self-sufficiency in food grains, doubling wheat
production by the 1970s with a strong buffer stock now in place.
CapabilitiesBy 2010, India may need to import food grains due to population growth, with estimates
suggesting demand could reach 340 million tons by 2020.
AgricultureChallenges include increasing demand for variety, reliance on irrigated land, and the need for
sustainable practices, particularly in underdeveloped regions.
International PressuresGlobal obligations require modernization and adherence to environmental standards, with
vulnerabilities arising from dependency on imports and climate change impacts.
The Technologies Biotechnology offers potential for crop production, with a focus on pest-resistant plants, while
conventional practices and water conservation are also essential.
Measures NeededStrategies needed include expanding productive areas, diversifying crops, and improving
productivity in underperforming regions, considering socio-economic factors.
and Agro-Food ProcessingInvestment in post-harvest technologies is crucial to reduce waste and improve efficiency to
position India as a competitive global agricultural player.
Vision for Action A comprehensive action plan across sectors is essential for agricultural prosperity,
emphasizing food security and rural prosperity through strategic planning.
Conclusion Achieving food security and a sustainable agricultural future requires continuous effort,
planning, and public engagement.
Food, Agriculture and Processing
Today, approximately 4% of India's population lives below
the poverty line, facing daily struggles to secure basic food.
The current situation has improved from past famines and
food shortages, particularly in the 1960s when India relied
Scan to Downloadheavily on American wheat imports.
The Crisis and Indian Food Security
The mid-1960s food crisis epitomized India's precarious food
security, prompting leadership to pursue self-sufficiency in
food grains. The introduction of improved rice and wheat
strains resulted in doubled wheat production within three
years, leading to self-sufficiency in the 1970s. India now
possesses a robust buffer stock of food grains and has diverse
agricultural exports and processing activities.
Future Needs and Capabilities
Despite progress, challenges remain. Projections suggest
India may need to import up to 14 million tons of food grains
by 2010 due to population growth and changing consumption
patterns. Studies predict food demand could surge to between
191 and 286 million tons by 2000, with estimates of 340
million tons by 2020. The increasing demand for variety
poses a strain on agriculture and food security.
Challenges to Indian Agriculture
Scan to DownloadThe agricultural sector faces significant challenges, primarily
from increasing demands for a variety of consumables, the
reliance on irrigated land, and the need for sustainable
techniques, especially in rain-fed areas which have
traditionally lagged in agricultural advancements. Successful
practices from other areas must be disseminated to tackle low
productivity scenarios in eastern and central India.
Environmental Problems and International
Global agricultural obligations under GATT and WTO
compel India to modernize agricultural practices, improve
product quality, and adopt environmental standards. The
dependency on imports may lead to vulnerabilities, with
foreign markets dictating terms. Additionally, agricultural
practices must adapt to mitigate climate change impacts
while maintaining food security.
Advancements in biotechnology offer significant potential
for crop production, particularly with transgenic plants,
though current efforts primarily focus on pest-resistant
Scan to Downloadcotton. Research should emphasize key food crops, while
conventional agricultural practices still hold importance.
Water conservation and improved agricultural technologies
will also be vital.
Specific and Urgent Measures Needed
Proactive strategies are necessary to ensure food security,
including expanding productive areas, diversifying crops,
and enhancing productivity in underperforming regions.
Rural and urban agricultural development must also consider
socio-economic factors to encourage sustainable growth.
Post-Harvest Technologies and Agro-Food
The goal is for India to become a formidable player in global
agriculture. This requires modernized post-harvest
technologies to reduce waste and improve efficiency.
Investment in storage and processing facilities is imperative
to minimize losses and increase food availability.
Scan to DownloadAchieving agricultural prosperity involves implementing
immediate, medium, and long-term actions across various
sectors - cereals, milk, fruits, and vegetables. A
comprehensive action plan is critical to bolster India's
agricultural sector and enhance food security for all citizens,
creating resilience within local economies.
In conclusion, realizing this vision requires persistent effort,
strategic planning, and public engagement to foster a
sustainable agricultural future for India that prioritizes food
security and rural prosperity.
Scan to DownloadChapter 5 Summary : Materials and the
Materials and the Future
In this chapter, A.P.J. Abdul Kalam discusses the critical role
of materials in shaping human civilization and national
development. The advances in material science have
significantly influenced technology across diverse sectors,
from aerospace to healthcare, and emphasize the importance
of materials in everyday life.
Role of Materials in Progress
Kalam highlights that agricultural products stem from
biological resources, while non-living resources provide
energy and various everyday chemicals. Materials like
lightweight alloys have enabled technological advancements,
aiding the development of aircraft, satellites, and medical
devices. He underscores the significance of advanced
materials in improving the quality of life, particularly for the
disabled and aging population.
Scan to DownloadVision for India's Material Landscape
Kalam presents a vision for India's future in material science,
acknowledging the strides made since independence but also
the gaps that remain. He identifies 13 critical areas for
development: steel, titanium, aluminum, rare earth materials,
composites, ceramics, building materials, photonic materials,
superconducting materials, polymeric materials, nuclear
materials, biomaterials, and surface engineering. The
engagement of R&D, industry, and academia is vital for
achieving breakthroughs and acquiring competitive
Strategic Resources and Development
The author discusses India's rich mineral resources,
particularly in iron, titanium, and aluminum, and emphasizes
the need for effective use of these materials. He reflects on
the missed opportunities in developing proprietary alloys and
technologies due to a lack of collaboration among R&D
Scan to DownloadKalam outlines the potential growth of key industries such as
steel, aluminum, and titanium by leveraging technological
expertise and improving operational efficiencies. He calls for
increased investments and innovative thinking to enhance
India's position in the global materials market.
Advancements Across Material Categories
India has abundant iron ore and a strong foundation for steel
production, with a projected increase in production capacity

With 37% of the world's ilmenite resources, India aims to
expand its titanium industry significantly, focusing on
non-aerospace applications and affordable implants for

Scan to Download The industry is poised for growth due to excellent bauxite
reserves and will focus on recycling and developing

Significant growth is expected in transportation and
construction sectors, driven by advances in production and

Ceramics & Advanced Applications:
The usage of ceramics in various high-tech applications is
anticipated to expand, enhancing performance across

Photonic and Superconducting Materials:
The chapter emphasizes the importance of these materials in
technology applications, with India's potential to lead in

Scan to Download India has made strides in medical device production, yet
there is a pressing need to enhance capabilities to meet
Investment and Policy Recommendations
Kalam stresses the need for government and private sector
investment in material technologies while advocating for
policy changes to support innovation and research
commercialization. He envisions India capitalizing on its vast
human resources, by fostering entrepreneurship and
localizing production to continuously excel in technology.
Kalam encapsulates a transformative vision where India can
emerge as a global leader in material science by 2020,
impacting various sectors and contributing to overall national
prosperity. Success requires commitment, collaborative
efforts, and strategic investment in developing materials that
Scan to DownloadChapter 6 Summary : Chemicals
Industries and Our Biological Wealth
Chemical Industries and Our Biological Wealth
The chapter discusses the significance and impact of
chemical industries on human life, including both benefits
and challenges. Chemicals play a crucial role in food
security, health care, and everyday products. However, the
industry also poses environmental risks such as pollution and
The Dual Nature of Chemicals
While chemicals provide numerous advantages, they also
introduce challenges like air and water pollution and the
potential for catastrophic accidents, as exemplified by the
Bhopal gas tragedy. The chapter highlights the need for
ethical practices in chemical engineering to prevent misuse
Scan to Downloadand ensure safety.
Growth and Development of the Chemical Industry
The chemical industry has evolved through distinct phases:
penetration, consolidation, and specialty. It is deeply
intertwined with economic, technological, and environmental
considerations. The Indian chemical industry has seen
growth since the establishment of its first petroleum refinery
in 1954, currently forming a key part of the country's
Global Context and Challenges
India's share of the global chemicals market is modest, yet
the country has established a presence across various
chemical sectors and possesses research and development
capabilities. The industry must adapt to changing market
dynamics, focus on sustainability, and overcome the reliance
India's aspirations for its chemical industry include
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Scan to DownloadChapter 7 Summary : Manufacturing for
MANUFACTURING FOR THE FUTURE
Manufacturing has evolved significantly over time, with
India having a rich history of traditional skills and
craftsmanship. Despite its innovative past, India lagged in
adopting modern manufacturing technologies during the
colonial era, only beginning to industrialize in earnest in the
late 19th and early 20th centuries with some pioneering
THE MODERN FACE OF MANUFACTURING
The last 150 years have seen profound changes in
manufacturing due to mass production techniques that
originated in the West and were later advanced by Japan. The
emergence of consumer demand transformed business
paradigms, with the advent of electricity and electronics
paving the way for computerized design and manufacturing
processes like CAD and CAM. This evolution fosters
Scan to Downloadcustomization and improved efficiency in production
Innovative tools, including lasers and waterjets, have become
essential in modern manufacturing, enabling operations that
were previously impossible. The Indian manufacturing sector
stands to benefit from the integration of computer
technology, presenting opportunities to build on successes in
software development, particularly in cities recognized as
tech hubs like Bangalore and Hyderabad.
TECHNOLOGY VISION FOR SOFTWARE
India must leverage its existing strengths in software
development to capture emerging global markets, especially
in advanced systems for manufacturing and healthcare.
Projects already in motion highlight India's potential, but
there's an urgent need to improve the quality of software
developed domestically to avoid dependency on foreign
designs. The country can aspire to be a global player in
high-end software production by 2020.
While focusing on high-end manufacturing, a significant
Scan to Downloadportion of India's economy is still supported by small and
medium enterprises. These units need to enhance their
operational efficiencies through modernization and upskilling
as they face increasing competition from technologically
The vision for India also includes robust plans for specific
industries, including textiles, electrical machines, and
transportation equipment, each poised for substantial growth
India's progress in various manufacturing sectors raises
questions about its unique contributions compared to global
advancements. The ultimate goal should be to eradicate
poverty and provide quality of life for all citizens while
fostering a system that encourages innovation and
adaptability. By addressing specific challenges in agriculture,
chemical processes, and leveraging its biodiversity, India has
the potential to create unique solutions and achieve global
recognition, especially through advanced manufacturing
In conclusion, India can strive for a balanced approach that
incorporates both traditional strengths and modern
Scan to Downloadadvancements, ensuring an inclusive and progressive future
Scan to DownloadChapter 8 Summary : Services As
Services As People's Wealth
Introduction to the Services Sector
The services sector has gained prominence in the economy as
a significant component, encompassing various activities
such as trading, marketing, public services, and teaching. The
advancement in agriculture and manufacturing has
accelerated its growth. In India, about 60-70% of the
workforce is in agriculture, but as mechanization reduces
agricultural jobs, many seek better opportunities in urban
Modern information technologies blur the lines between
sectors, allowing for innovative services like computer
simulations for product development or satellite data for
Scan to Downloadagricultural advisories. While some advocate that countries
can thrive solely on services, Kalam argues that India must
bolster its agriculture for food security and its manufacturing
Role of Technology in Employment
The rise of technology, especially in computing, has
revolutionized efficiency across sectors. However, the
government and industries must prepare the workforce for
continuous skill enhancement amid rapid technological
In India, the agriculture sector contributes 32.7% to GDP, the
manufacturing sector 25.8%, and the services sector
approximately 40%. New areas such as advertising and
consultancy are emerging, presenting opportunities for job
creation and enhancing national wealth.
Key service sectors identified in TIFAC reports include:
: Growth in banking and insurance sectors is substantial but
requires modernization through IT.
: Marketing strategies are evolving with a growing literate
middle class, calling for tailored products and services.
: Modern tourists seek immersive experiences, prompting a
need for technology to enhance their travel experiences.
Investments in human capital are vital. Key areas for future
development include improving education quality,
empowering women, investing in science and technology,
and enhancing entrepreneurial skills.
Several challenges persist in HRD, government efficiency,
and the services sector. The government must transform to a
Scan to Downloadfacilitative role, ensuring better integration with global
markets and infrastructure development.
Modern security needs necessitate a technological upgrade,
with requirements for advanced surveillance and IT
The services sector presents an opportunity for vast
employment and wealth generation, but its development must
be inclusive, focusing on skill enhancement and technology
adaptation. With proactive measures, the imagined future
includes a well-connected, efficient services framework
supporting economic growth for all Indians.
Scan to DownloadChapter 9 Summary : Strategic
- Strategy refers to planning and the conduct of campaigns in
business, politics, or military contexts.
- Strategic industries provide India with a competitive
advantage beyond just military aspects.
- Post-World War II, security encompasses economic and
technological dimensions, along with traditional defense.
- Food availability is crucial for national well-being.
- Maintaining consistent food supply against natural
calamities is essential, especially for populous nations like
Scan to DownloadEconomic Security
- Economic security is linked to sustainable growth and
- Developed countries expand markets through multinational
corporations and cartels, leading to high technological
dependency for developing nations.
- The balance between imports and exports is vital for
economic stability, often pressure-laden and reliant on
Critical Technologies for India
- India should focus on developing critical technologies to
- The National Critical Technologies Panel identifies criteria
for selecting crucial technologies for national
Defense Supplies in India
- Current indigenous defense production is around 30%, with
a goal to raise this to 70%.
- Self-reliance requires focusing on indigenous technology
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Scan to DownloadChapter 10 Summary : Health Care for
Health Care for All
The chapter emphasizes the essential need for universal
health care in India, reflecting on the stark disparities in
access to drinking water and health services among different
socioeconomic classes. It asserts that a nation's progress can
be measured by its ability to provide health care, which
includes disease prevention and effective treatment.
Effective sanitation, clean drinking water, and large-scale
immunization programs are critical for preventing
communicable diseases. The chapter highlights the
importance of nutrition in disease prevention, noting that
conditions like goiter and vitamin A deficiency could be
Scan to Downloadcountered with simple dietary changes. Unfortunately, the
poorer segments of society lack health education and access
Sanitation and Drinking Water
The necessity for proper waste management and sanitation is
outlined as pivotal for health. Case studies from urban slums
illustrate the dire need for improved sanitation facilities.
Innovative technologies, like those developed by DRDO for
desalination, are proving effective in providing clean water to
For better health outcomes, environmental conditions,
working conditions, and nutritional standards need to be
prioritized. A robust health care system requires investments
and proactive measures from employers and governments,
supported by public awareness and community health
Challenges of a Dual Society
Scan to DownloadThe chapter delineates the two starkly different 'Indias' that
exist - the affluent populations that enjoy modern health care
and amenities versus the majority who suffer from
preventable diseases. A concerted effort is required to
address diseases prevalent in developing countries, such as
TB and AIDS, while also preparing for the rise of
non-communicable diseases associated with modernization.
Immediate Steps for Health Care
The chapter advocates for the urgent need to prioritize the
eradication of infectious diseases and emphasizes research
and development for preventive technologies. Community
participation and awareness campaigns are crucial strategies
for tackling health disparities.
A significant focus is placed on the rise of cardiovascular
diseases and the cultural factors influencing health. It
emphasizes the need for innovative, cost-effective diagnostic
tools and treatments. The discussion covers diabetes and
cancer, which also require a systemic response beyond
specialized treatments limited to the wealthy.
Scan to DownloadVision for the Future
The text concludes with a robust vision for a healthier India,
stressing that efficient health care systems can be built by
leveraging existing technologies and the capabilities of local
industries. Maternal and child health are highlighted as
crucial areas for development, with a call for a
comprehensive approach that fosters improved health access
for all segments of society.
The overarching message is one of urgency and hope, calling
for a collective effort to recognize health as a fundamental
right, with particular emphasis on the interconnectedness of
India's health ecosystem. The chapter highlights that
providing care should not just be the responsibility of the
government but a shared cause among all Indians, guided by
empathy and concern for collective well-being.
Key Point :The urgent need for universal health care
Example:Imagine walking through your neighborhood,
seeing a mother unable to afford vaccinations for her
child while affluent families access the latest medical
treatments without a thought. This stark reality
exemplifies the urgent need for universal health care in
India, where your community's health reflects the
nation's progress. Ensuring equitable access to basic
health services, sanitary conditions, and nutritional
programs can transform lives and uplift society as a
Scan to DownloadCritical Thinking
Key Point :Health as a Universal Right
Critical Interpretation :While A.P.J. Abdul Kalam's call
for universal health care reflects an aspirational vision
for India, it also raises questions about the feasibility of
such a system in a nation characterized by deep
economic disparities. The expectation that health care
should be universally accessible might underestimate
the complexities involved in implementing policies that
effectively bridge the gap between affluent and
impoverished communities. Critics may argue that
without addressing underlying issues of income
inequality and governance, efforts toward universal
health care could prove ineffective. This discussion is
further supported by various studies, including reports
from the World Health Organization, which underscore
the significant challenges in ensuring equitable health
services in developing countries.
Scan to DownloadChapter 11 Summary : The Enabling
Vision for Developed India
The vision of a developed India aims to eradicate poverty by
2010 and build a fast-growing economy leveraging core
competencies across sectors. Agriculture, agro-food
processing, and various fields necessitate engineered inputs,
electronic sensors, and biotechnology to enhance
The effective supply of agricultural produce and value
addition in sectors such as transportation is critical for
competitiveness. This interconnectedness is vital for
economic growth, requiring both physical and digital
infrastructure to facilitate the swift movement of goods and
Technological Inputs and Value Addition
Value addition increases the market appeal of products,
exemplified through innovative practices in agriculture, such
as consistent quality packaging and preservation.
Technological advancements can optimize supply chains,
improve transportation, and ultimately enhance the consumer
Modern infrastructure, including roadways, railways, and
ports, must be enhanced to enable economic growth. This
requires significant investment, with estimates indicating a
need for substantial funds to upgrade and expand existing
Investment in infrastructure has risen, yet both private and
government sectors must collaborate to attract further
investments while ensuring public interests. Innovations and
Scan to Downloadstreamlined processes are necessary to reduce administrative
Electric Power and Energy Needs
A robust electric power infrastructure is crucial for
modernizing the economy. Current electricity generation and
distribution systems face challenges, necessitating immediate
actions to improve efficiency, reliability, and coverage.
Investments in renewable and clean energy sources, such as
wind and solar, hold promise for sustainable development.
Enhanced energy efficiency and conservation efforts are
essential to maximize existing resources.
Water Transport and Infrastructure
Waterways represent an efficient transportation method that
is underutilized in India. Enhancing water transport could
alleviate congestion in other transport systems and provide a
cost-effective way of moving goods, especially in areas with
Scan to DownloadTelecommunications as a Backbone
The telecommunications infrastructure plays a critical role in
economic growth and connectivity. The government must
encourage private sector participation to expand and improve
the telecommunications network rapidly.
Rural Connectivity and Development
Rural areas require modern facilities and connectivity to
bridge the urban-rural divide, fostering economic growth and
reducing urban congestion. Embedding decentralized
industries could catalyze rural development.
India's achievements in technology often face external
skepticism regarding the origin of innovations. There's a
need to emphasize self-reliance in technological
development, acknowledging indigenous contributions while
This chapter highlights the intricacies of developing a robust
infrastructure and emphasizes the need for a collaborative
Scan to Downloadapproach between the government, private sector, and society
to propel India towards becoming a developed nation.
Scan to DownloadChapter 12 Summary : Realizing the
Introduction to Vision and Challenges
A press conference held by a high-level committee revealed
the common issue of reports without action in India. The
shift in population dynamics, particularly with a younger
demographic, signifies potential for actual progress towards
the Technology Vision 2020 initiatives. The dismantling of
outdated systems is seen as a catalyst for entrepreneurial
Restatement of the Vision
By 2020, India aims to be among the top five economic
powers with self-reliance in national security, addressing
agriculture, technology, and health sectors:
- Agriculture: Enhance productivity and achieve
Scan to Downloadself-sufficient food production.
- Technological Advancement: Develop capabilities in
materials, pharmaceuticals, and clean processes.
- Global Leadership: Strive for a significant services sector
driven by skilled human resources.
Actionable Steps for Realization
A spirited discussion led to the realization that rather than
providing a comprehensive action plan, individuals and
sectors must contribute through incremental steps toward
national development. Emphasizing the role of "punyatmas,"
"punyadhikaris," and "punyanetas," collective action is
Roles of Various Stakeholders
: Integral in creating employment and driving economic
growth. Industries should adopt individual projects
contributing to the national vision.
Public Sector Units (PSUs)
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Scan to DownloadBest Quotes from India 2020 by A.P.J.
Abdul Kalam with Page Numbers
View on Bookey Website and Generate Beautiful Quote Images
| Quotes From Pages 11-32
1.We believe, moreover, that while aggregated
indicators are important, it does not make sense to
achieve a 'developed' status without a major and
continuing upliftment of all Indians who exist
today and of the many more millions who would
be added in the years to come.
2.Gandhiji's strikingly simple criterion was that every action
proposed or contemplated, should in its implementation
wipe the tears of a poor and downtrodden person.
3.Any organization, society or even a nation without a vision
is like a ship cruising on the high seas without any aim or
4.The first vision: freedom for India... Our last generation,
the glorious generation of freedom fighters, led by
Mahatma Gandhi... set for the nation a vision of free India.
Scan to Download5.We are not advocating xenophobia nor isolation. But all of
us have to be clear that nobody is going to hold our hands
to lead us into the 'developed country club'.
| Quotes From Pages 33-50
1.Believe nothing, merely because you have been
told it, or because it is traditional or because you
yourselves have imagined it. Do not believe what
your teacher tells you merely out of respect for
your teacher. But whatever after due consideration
and analysis you find be conductive to the good,
the benefit, the welfare of all beings, that doctrine,
believe and cling to and take it as your guide.
2.Somewhere down the line in our long history, we appear to
have lost faith in ourselves. That mindset seems to persist.
3.However, there are brighter spots too.
4.It is good to read, hear and see what others have done.
However, the conclusions regarding what is good for our
country are to be shaped by our own people.
5.The underlying principle is that economic growth must be
Scan to Downloaddriven by science and technology and scientific and
technological principles must be geared to economic
| Quotes From Pages 51-64
1.Your country, brother, shall be your love! Good
unto better you shall improve!
2.Let the land be abundant in milk and honey! Flood the land
with goods, all made at home!
3.Bragging never did anybody any good! Quietly, do a fine
4.Technology is the highest wealth generator in the shortest
5.In the final analysis, any group of people in any given
locale and under any condition can accomplish what they
6.Indians not only have a great learning capability but most
of them also have an entrepreneurial and competitive spirit.
7.I firmly believe that ignited minds are the power resources.
Can we trigger the young minds in national development?
Scan to DownloadChapter 4 | Quotes From Pages 65-87
1.If the farmer's hands slacken even the ascetic's
2.This crisis gave the country's leadership an opportunity to
resolve to become self-sufficient in food grains.
3.India has tremendous potential for increasing production.
4.We cannot afford to believe that we are far enough ahead in
the race to go to sleep like the hare which lost to a tortoise.
5.Let us build on their strengths.
6.The Indian approach to food security is not to be restricted
or limited to just meeting our own demands.
7.These efforts will usher in great prosperity to a large
number of people in rural areas and small towns, through
employment and wealth creation.
8.Our farmers are exceptionally entrepreneurial, and have
proved it again and again.
| Quotes From Pages 88-115
1.If we were to pause for a moment to think about
the growth of human civilization, we would find
Scan to Downloadthat the pace of social and economic growth has
been closely linked to the proficiency with which
people have been able to use and shape materials.
2.The denial of beryllium products was one of the early
lessons for me : if you don't have the technology, your
natural resource is of no value to you.
3.We allowed things to slip. We were running between
America and the then Soviet Union (now Russia) to build
Bokara. Even after that, we were generally slack.
4.We need not lament about the missed opportunities. As
Henry Ford often used to say, 'Burn my factories but give
me the people who were there; I will build a new business.'
5.We will truly arrive as a country with advanced material
technology when we create effective golden triangle from
our own knowledge base.
6.We have a dream to provide similar devices in standard
sizes to millions will surely transform into reality.
| Quotes From Pages 116-135
1.Deliverance ?where is this Deliverance to be
2.Our master himself has joyfully taken upon Him the bonds
of creation; He is bound with us all for ever.
3.The fact of the matter is that at no time in human history
have the benefits of knowledge been as widely available to
a large number of persons as in second half of the twentieth
4.Yes, we want to repeat this again: just as in every other
field of human activity, science and technology can also be
used for wrong purposes.
5.If only we could capture the wealth of these biological
resources through the assiduous application of technology,
we could easily become an economic power to reckon with.
6.Since time immemorial, Himalayan flora has been a major
source of medicinal plants, and the cold desert is not an
Scan to DownloadChapter 7 | Quotes From Pages 136-150
1.'It is no longer necessary to make prototypes in a
factory or a laboratory to study a new product.'
2.'If we also, as a country and as a people, focus our efforts
to eradicate poverty and to develop in a sustained manner,
we don't think any obstacle could withstand the force of
that collective, coherent, and focused will!'
3.'No big economy can survive only with activities which
demand highly intellectual inputs.'
4.'The essence of software is in its design.'
5.'We cannot afford to forget a large number of small and
tiny manufacturing units which are in the organized and the
6.'It cannot be achieved in the older style of central
coordination and delay-prone hierarchical systems.'
7.'A redeeming feature of the domestic and export
manufacturing methods is that there is no longer going to
be a centralized and monolithic mass manufacturing base.'
8.'We do not envision an India which gives up manufacturing
Scan to Downloadin favour of agriculture and services.'
| Quotes From Pages 151-178
1.We are what we think. All that we are arises with
our thoughts. With our thoughts, we make our
2.India cannot afford not to build its strengths in agriculture
for reasons of food and nutritional security.
3.Thus, the services sector, if properly developed along with
the other two important and basic sectors, can really be
considered a sector in the service of the people, to find new
jobs and individual prosperity.
4.The existing workforce thus needs to be trained in new
5.The agricultural sector may also use information
technology much more intensely than it does now.
6.Modern technologies including IT help the process very
greatly and provide new opportunities.
| Quotes From Pages 179-205
Scan to Download2.Real economic security is assured through technology
strengths in areas which are important to the economy.
3.If for some period the imports greatly exceed the exports or
if during the period some withdrawals of foreign
investment take place, fear of a currency crisis ensues.
4.A country takes a long time to develop technological
5.The absence of certain processes in India so far has often
been due to insufficient attention to absorb, adapt and
upgrade imported know-how and equipment.
6.Future defense operations are going to be based on multiple
networks of Army, Navy, Air Force, and space systems.
7.We owe it to the future generations that we hand them over
by 2020 only the excitement and challengers of the future
and not have to struggle with the problems of 'bridging the
past gaps ' as we are doing today!
Scan to DownloadChapter 10 | Quotes From Pages 206-227
1.Don't give a place to disease." - Auvaiyyar, Tamil
2.In the ultimate analysis, any society will be judged by its
ability to provide universal health care for its people.
3.Better sanitary conditions and an improved
microenvironment in the habitat or workplace are the most
important requirements for health.
4.The rich at least have access to information about
health-related issues... That is not the case with many
lower-income groups and poorer people.
5.A sick worker cannot give his or her best even with the
| Quotes From Pages 228-251
1.Indeed one's faith in one's plans and methods are
truly tested when the horizon before one is the
2.A modern developed economy cannot be built on a large
number of people living just above the poverty line,
Scan to Downloadproducing agricultural products alone and cut off from the
rest of the manufacturing and business centers.
3.Value addition is simply enhancement of the value of
material with process attached.
4.Modern technologies can make reliable and efficient
transportation systems a reality, providing Indians with the
right to good roads, quick clearing facilities, and comfort
5.No nation can aspire to be modern and developed without
the availability of quality power for all.
6.Waste heat from steel plants today is rejected at relatively
high absolute temperature levels. If, say, 20 percent of this
energy is recovered in the form of waste heat, this could be
used to fuel a medium-sized power plant.
7.We should learn to share largesse and resources amongst
ourselves and evolve an efficient water management
| Quotes From Pages 252-285
1.I have learnt to use the word 'impossible' with the
Scan to Downloadgreatest caution.
2.Somehow over the years, we have developed a habit of
giving low priority to actual action on the ground.
3.The earlier system whereby all initiatives were left to a few
departments in New Delhi has fast undergone a change.
4.We would like to see that in the coming years actual
achievements in the TIFAC Technology Vision 2020
reports can the country be geared up for action to realize
the new vision for India 2020.
5.Let us not take a strong moralistic posture. Let the past
mistake be redeemed as we act towards making the country
a developed one, and the only one totally free of poverty.
6.We need to initiate action with an overall vision of
developed India, particularly on the lines given above.
7.If each of us attempts to do so in our spheres of work the
status of developed India will arrive sooner than we expect.
Scan to DownloadIndia 2020 Questions
View on Bookey Website
| Can India Become a Developed
What is a key indicator of whether India can become a
Answer:A key indicator is the per capita income,
which reflects the average income of people, but
does not show the distribution of wealth among the
What is the significance of Gandhi's talisman in the
Answer:Gandhi's talisman states that every action should
wipe tears from the face of the poorest person. This implies
that true development can only be measured by the welfare of
How does technological advancement contribute to
Scan to DownloadIndia's vision of development?
Answer:Technological advancement is crucial as it leads to
economic growth, creates productive employment, and
improves living standards, making it integral for India's
What major challenge does India face on the path to
becoming a developed country?
Answer:India faces challenges such as income inequality and
ensuring that the benefits of economic growth are equitably
distributed among all its citizens.
According to the author, how can India ensure its
national security in an economically dominated world?
Answer:India must develop indigenous technologies to
strengthen its defenses and ensure economic independence,
as reliance on external technologies undermines national
What is the vision for India's economy by the year 2020,
Scan to Downloadas laid out in the text?
Answer:By 2020, India aims to be among the top economies
globally, ensuring high standards of education, health, and
security for its citizens while maintaining sustainable growth.
What does the author imply by saying 'a nation is made
great by its people'?
Answer:This suggests that the true strength of a nation lies in
the empowerment, education, and well-being of its people,
which ultimately shapes its development.
How can social opportunities play a role in India's growth
according to Amartya Sen?
Answer:Expansion of educational facilities, healthcare, and
social security are essential for creating social opportunities
that enable individuals to improve their living conditions and
contribute to economic growth.
What critical infrastructure development does the author
emphasize for achieving a developed India?
Scan to DownloadAnswer:Development of human resources and technology
capabilities is emphasized, alongside strengthening national
infrastructure in agriculture, manufacturing, and services.
Why is a long-term perspective important for India's
Answer:A long-term perspective ensures that the progress
achieved is sustainable and that all citizens can benefit from
ongoing economic and social advancements.
| What other countries Envision for
What is the role of belief in achieving excellence
according to A.P.J. Abdul Kalam?
Answer:A.P.J. Abdul Kalam emphasizes the
importance of critical thinking and independent
belief over blind faith in tradition or authority. He
refers to a teaching by the Buddha, advocating for
individuals to believe only in doctrines that
contribute positively to the welfare of all being. This
Scan to Downloadapproach is crucial for fostering excellence, as it
urges people to analyze, question, and innovate
rather than merely imitate.
How can India regain its confidence in technology and
Answer:Kalam suggests overcoming the defeatist mentality
that has crept into Indian society by reviving the faith in
indigenous capabilities. He highlights the importance of
looking at India's past accomplishments in technology, such
as the invention of rockets by Tippu Sultan's engineers. By
recognizing and celebrating these achievements, India can
inspire a new generation to innovate and contribute to global
What vision did the United States establish to drive its
Answer:The United States adopted a comprehensive vision
aimed at achieving technological leadership through strategic
Scan to Downloadcommitments from both the government and private sectors.
This vision included significant investment in research and
development, promoting innovation across industries, and
fostering a competitive spirit that enabled individuals and
corporations to thrive and push technological boundaries.
Can you explain the significance of Japan's technological
Answer:Japan's strategy was built on the principle of
developing internal technological capabilities rather than
solely relying on importing technology. This was achieved
through sustained investments in R&D and collaboration
among various sectors, leading Japan to transform from a
technology importer to a net exporter. Their long-term vision
incorporated collective effort from industries, consumers,
and academics, demonstrating the power of unified goals in
In what ways did Malaysia's vision for the future
Scan to DownloadAnswer:Both Malaysia and India recognized the importance
of a cohesive national vision for development. Malaysia's
Technology Vision 2020 emphasized balanced growth in
economic, social, and environmental sectors. Similarly,
India's vision entails a holistic approach to addressing
poverty and technological advancement. Both countries
aspire to enhance indigenous capabilities and promote
sustainable practices while leveraging foreign investments.
What lessons can India learn from Israel's approach to
Answer:Israel's approach underscores the value of
innovation and technology in overcoming natural resource
constraints. Despite its geographical challenges, Israel
prioritized food security and pursued advances in agriculture,
achieving remarkable productivity. India can emulate this
model by developing and implementing sustainable
agricultural practices and leveraging technology to enhance
food security and crop yield.
How does A.P.J. Abdul Kalam view the relationship
between technological development and national identity?
Answer:Kalam views technological development as intrinsic
to a nation's identity and progress. He argues that developing
indigenous technologies fosters self-reliance and national
pride, allowing countries like India to navigate global
challenges effectively. By establishing a strong tech base, a
nation not only secures its future but also gains a significant
standing on the international stage.
What is the common feature shared by the nations
discussed regarding technological vision?
Answer:The common feature among the nations is the
establishment of a clear,long-term vision that integrates
science and technology into economic growth strategies.
Each country's approach emphasizes the necessity of research
and development, innovation, and the collaboration of
various sectors to drive national progress and address societal
What is Kalam's call to action for India as it looks toward
Answer:Kalam calls for India to eradicate poverty and
establish itself as a developed nation by 2020. He urges the
nation to harness its technological strengths and leverage
innovation as a means of achieving economic prosperity and
societal welfare. His message is one of belief in India's
potential and the need to take affirmative, collective action to
realize a brighter future.
| Evolution of Technology Vision 2020|
What is the essence of India's core competencies as
Answer:India's core competencies revolve around
its rich natural and human resources, cultural
diversity, and industrial capacity. The chapter
emphasizes that by harnessing these strengths
Scan to Downloadthrough technology and innovation, India can
achieve self-reliance and significant progress by the
How does define 'core competency'?
Answer:Core competency refers to the inherent strengths that
enable specific groups or the nation to deliver superior results
in particular areas. It includes being able to absorb new
techniques and skills effectively, and accomplish better
outcomes given the same effort, often due to a supportive
environment or unique experiences.
What role did TIFAC play in shaping India's Technology
Answer:The Technology Information, Forecasting and
Assessment Council (TIFAC), formed in 1988, was pivotal in
analyzing emerging technologies to promote national
development. It engaged various stakeholders to create a
framework that identified areas of strength and needed
Scan to Downloadactions, propelling India towards its technological
What key question arose during the TIFAC council
meeting about India's status and future?
Answer:A crucial question posed was about what would
transition India from a developing country to a developed
nation almost fifty years after independence, sparking intense
discussions and leading to the establishment of national
Why is technology described as the 'highest wealth
generator' in the context of India's future?
Answer:Technology is viewed as the 'highest wealth
generator' because when harnessed correctly, it can rapidly
enhance productivity and drive economic growth across
multiple sectors including agriculture, industry, and services,
thereby addressing issues like poverty and education.
What are some of the main objectives outlined in the
Scan to DownloadTechnology Vision 2020?
Answer:The primary objectives include removing poverty,
ensuring health and education for all, providing employment
opportunities, achieving net export status, and ensuring
self-reliance in national security. Each of these goals
necessitates the development of core competencies.
What is the significance of 'ignited minds' as mentioned
towards the end of the chapter?
Answer:The phrase 'ignited minds' symbolizes the potential
of the youth and the population to contribute to national
development. It highlights that with the right motivation and
resources, individuals can push towards achieving the vision
of a developed nation.
How does the chapter suggest India can capitalize on its
Answer:The chapter suggests that by training unskilled
workers, providing better skills to those already trained, and
Scan to Downloadcreating a conducive environment for educated individuals,
India can significantly leverage its human resources to meet
and even exceed national development goals.
In what ways does connect technology to
national security and economic stability?
Answer:The chapter argues that technological advances are
integral to strengthening the political, economic, and security
frameworks of the nation. Improved technology facilitates
greater self-sufficiency, which in turn enhances national
security and economic resilience.
What overarching message does convey about
Answer:The overarching message is one of optimism and
potential; if India can effectively utilize its resources, focus
on education and technology, and harness its collective
capabilities, it can transform into a developed nation by
Scan to DownloadChapter 4 | Food, Agriculture and Processing| Q&A
What historical context led to India's current food
Answer:In the years 1965-67, India faced severe
food shortages, depending on foreign grain imports
during droughts. This crisis prompted the
leadership to prioritize self-sufficiency in food
grains, coinciding with advancements in agricultural
technology, particularly in high-yield varieties of
wheat and rice. Consequently, within a short period,
India's wheat production doubled, leading to food
grain self-sufficiency by the 1970s.
What challenges does India face regarding food and
agriculture in the future?
Answer:India's agricultural challenges include a rising
population projected at 1.3 billion by 2020, increased
economic growth leading to higher consumption, changes in
Scan to Downloaddietary habits, and the need to efficiently manage limited
arable land while maintaining sustainable practices.
How can technological advancements play a role in
enhancing agricultural productivity in India?
biotechnology for developing pest-resistant crops, efficient
irrigation methods, remote sensing for monitoring crop
yields, and improved post-harvest processing technologies,
are crucial for increasing productivity and ensuring food
What is the vision for India's agricultural future as
expressed in this chapter?
Answer:The vision for India's agricultural future emphasizes
becoming a global leader in agricultural production, focusing
on sustainable practices, improving yields in rain-fed areas,
leveraging technology to enhance food processing, and
ensuring food security for the population while addressing
Scan to Downloadclimate change challenges.
Why is post-harvest technology critical for India's
Answer:Post-harvest technology is critical as it significantly
reduces food losses, currently estimated at 10% for grains
and 25% for fruits and vegetables. Modernizing storage and
processing facilities will not only minimize wastage but also
enhance the economic value of agricultural products,
contributing to rural prosperity.
What lessons from the Green Revolution can be applied
to future agricultural strategies in India?
Answer:The Green Revolution demonstrated the importance
of adopting new technologies, extending knowledge to
farmers, and fostering community-driven agricultural
practices. Future strategies should replicate these principles
by focusing on region-specific crops, enhancing farmer
education, and promoting agricultural innovation through
Scan to Downloadcollaboration across disciplines.
What specific actions are recommended to improve water
management for agricultural sustainability?
Answer:The chapter emphasizes improving water-use
efficiency through methods like drip irrigation and rainwater
harvesting, treating water as a national resource, and
implementing modern irrigation techniques to support
agriculture in arid regions, ensuring that water scarcity does
not limit agricultural productivity.
What role do international standards and obligations play
in shaping India's agricultural practices?
Answer:International trade agreements and environmental
standards necessitate compliance with safety and quality
measures that dictate the use of agrochemicals and fertilizers.
This shapes India's agricultural practices and compels
adherence to sustainable methods, aligning domestic farming
How does the chapter propose improving agricultural
practices in rain-fed regions?
Answer:The chapter suggests focusing on region-specific
crops suited to local agro-climatic conditions, enhancing
community-based water conservation efforts, and providing
farmers in rain-fed areas with exposure to successful
agricultural models from more productive regions.
What is the importance of farmer education and
innovation according to the chapter?
Answer:Educating farmers about modern agricultural
practices, technologies, and market demands is vital for
increasing productivity and sustainability. Promotion of
innovation through interaction, exposure to advanced
techniques, and fostering entrepreneurship among farmers
can lead to significant agricultural improvements.
| Materials and the Future| Q&A
How have advanced materials influenced human progress
Scan to Downloadand day-to-day life?
Answer:Advanced materials have been foundational
to human civilization's progress; they enable
innovations in multiple sectors. Lightweight
materials like titanium and composites have
enhanced the performance of medical devices,
aircraft, and construction materials, easing daily
tasks and improving quality of life. Their pervasive
use - from prosthetics that assist disabled
individuals to materials in technological
devices - illustrates their role in everyday comforts,
enhanced accessibility, and improved health
What lessons can be learned from the development of
Answer:India's limited production of titanium, despite
possessing vast ore reserves, underscores the critical need for
technological advancement and innovation. Past failures to
Scan to Downloadestablish a robust titanium industry highlight the importance
of effective governance and collaboration between academia,
industry, and research institutions. The initiation of a
titanium sponge production plant signifies a positive change,
stressing that technological capability is essential for
leveraging natural resources for industrial growth.
Why is it important for India to innovate in materials
Answer:Innovation in materials technology is crucial for
India's development trajectory. Mastery of high-tech
materials can lead to competitive advantages in industries
like aerospace, healthcare, and construction, resulting in
economic growth and employment generation. As global
markets evolve, embracing technology enables India to
emerge as a key player rather than a subordinate exporter.
What role do biocompatible materials play in healthcare
Scan to DownloadAnswer:Biocompatible materials, such as titanium,
significantly enhance healthcare by providing durable, safe,
and effective implants for patients. These materials reduce
pain and improve the quality of life for individuals with
conditions like hip or bone ailments, making advanced
medical solutions accessible to a broader population.
Innovations in this field could transform medical practices
How can the concept of 'surface engineering' impact
material utilization in various industries?
Answer:Surface engineering allows for the enhancement of
material properties through protective coatings and
treatments, improving durability and performance. In
industries like manufacturing and healthcare, this technology
can lead to longer-lasting tools, reduce maintenance costs,
and optimize functionality, thus increasing efficiency and
Scan to DownloadWhat future challenges and opportunities arise from
India's material resources, according to the chapter?
Answer:India's material resources present opportunities for
growth in sectors like steel and aluminum, yet challenges
include technological dependency and the need for
sustainable practices. To capitalize on these opportunities,
India must focus on innovation, investment in R&D, and
modernizing equipment and processes to improve
competitiveness and reduce environmental impacts.
What is the significance of composites in the context of
Answer:Composite materials are significant due to their
superior strength-to-weight ratios, enhancing efficiency
across numerous applications like transportation and
construction. Their ability to reduce dead weight while
maintaining integrity is particularly crucial for innovations in
aerospace, potentially leading to fuel efficiency and cost
How does advanced material technology influence
Answer:Advanced material technologies, such as the
recycling of aluminum and the use of fly ash in construction,
enhance environmental sustainability by reducing waste and
conserving resources. The development and use of
eco-friendly materials align with global sustainability goals,
making sectors like construction and manufacturing more
energy-efficient and less polluting.
| Chemicals Industries and Our Biological
What is the significance of chemical industries in modern
life according to A.P.J. Abdul Kalam?
Answer:Chemical industries significantly impact
modern life by providing essential products such as
fertilizers, pharmaceuticals, and various household
items. They play a crucial role in food security,
health improvement, and enhance the quality of life
Scan to Downloadwhile also presenting environmental challenges that
necessitate responsible production practices.
How do chemical industries relate to environmental
concerns as discussed in this chapter?
Answer:The chapter highlights the dual nature of chemical
industries, where the benefits of chemical products are
accompanied by environmental challenges such as air
pollution, soil degradation, and water contamination. Events
like the Bhopal gas tragedy underscore the necessity for
environmental regulations and the ethical responsibility of
industries to mitigate harm.
What lessons can be drawn from historical developments
in chemical technology as seen in past centuries?
Answer:Historically, the development of chemical
technology has been uneven, often benefiting only a
privileged few. The chapter illustrates how advancements can
lead to mass production and affordability, thus creating
Scan to Downloadeconomic opportunities for a broader population, particularly
in the context of India's ongoing industrial progress.
What vision does Kalam present for the future of the
Indian chemical industry by 2020?
Answer:Kalam envisions a robust Indian chemical industry
with indigenous technology capabilities, cleaner production
processes, and innovative practices that leverage
biotechnology. He emphasizes the need for sustainability,
zero-waste technologies, and the potential of biological
resources as key drivers for India's economic growth.
How does the concept of biodiversity intersect with
technology according to this chapter?
Answer:The chapter asserts that India's rich biodiversity can
significantly contribute to technological advancements. By
harnessing its biological wealth through innovative
techniques, India could achieve economic growth and
sustainable development, creating products that are both
Scan to Downloadeco-friendly and commercially viable.
What role does traditional knowledge play in advancing
modern technology according to the text?
Answer:Traditional knowledge is portrayed as a valuable
resource that can complement and enhance modern scientific
approaches. The rediscovery and application of ancient
practices in areas such as herbal medicine can lead to
innovative products, demonstrating the necessity of
integrating historical wisdom with contemporary science.
What is the proposed action for India to capitalize on its
Answer:Kalam proposes that India must actively document
and protect its biodiversity by utilizing local knowledge and
modern technology. This involves organizing surveys,
investing in research, and innovating based on biophysical
resources, ultimately aiming for global leadership in
sustainable practices and products.
What challenges does the Indian chemical industry face
along with opportunities, according to the vision set
Answer:The Indian chemical industry faces challenges like
environmental regulations, outdated technologies, and
competition from global markets. However, opportunities
include developing specialized chemicals, enhancing R&D
capabilities, and capitalizing on India's biodiversity to create
Scan to DownloadChapter 7 | Manufacturing for the future| Q&A
What historical manufacturing skills did India possess in
ancient and medieval times?
Answer:India was renowned for traditional skills in
medicine, metallurgy, construction, textiles,
hydraulics, and early shipbuilding, producing
splendid metal icons and monuments like the Taj
What hindered India from advancing in manufacturing
during the medieval period?
Answer:India lagged in the invention of machines like the
internal combustion engine, which was crucial for the
industrial revolution, arriving during the colonial period.
What transformations occurred in manufacturing due to
Answer:Mass manufacturing techniques initiated rapid
change, leading to consumerism and strategies aimed at
Scan to Downloadalleviating poverty through mass production.
How has technology changed the manufacturing process
Answer:Technologies like CAD and CAM allow product
designs to be created and simulated on computers,
eliminating the traditional need for physical prototypes.
What role does software play in the modern
manufacturing landscape in India?
Answer:India is leveraging its software prowess to adapt its
manufacturing processes, with cities like Bangalore
becoming hubs for IT and software development.
What challenges does India face in maintaining its
Answer:India needs to move beyond being an application
support system and start creating original software designs to
harness long-term economic benefits.
Scan to DownloadWhat vision does India have for its software market by
Answer:India aims to capture 10 to 15% of the global market
for higher-end manufacturing software, alongside broader
software exports reaching $38 billion by 2008.
What potential advantages does India have in engineering
Answer:With advancements in CAD/CAM technologies and
a focus on automation, India could produce sophisticated
machine tools and become a net exporter of technology.
What is the significance of small and medium enterprises
in India's manufacturing future?
Answer:These enterprises possess innovative capabilities but
require systematic upgradation and modernization to
compete with more efficient, technologically advanced units.
How should India approach the goal of becoming a leader
Scan to DownloadAnswer:A concerted effort combining skilled labor,
advanced technologies, and entrepreneurship is required to
adapt to global manufacturing trends without sacrificing
Why is it important for India to find its uniqueness in
Answer:While adapting global technologies is essential,
cultivating unique innovations can foster national pride and
contribute to solving local economic issues.
What needs to be prioritized for India's future in
Answer:Addressing poverty, providing social opportunities,
ensuring economic growth, and developing a supportive
ecosystem for innovation and entrepreneurship are crucial.
How might India's agricultural practices reflect a unique
Answer:India's agricultural solutions may leverage its
Scan to Downloadbiodiversity and ancient knowledge to develop sustainable
and innovative farming techniques.
In what sectors does India have opportunities to create
Answer:India can innovate in the chemicals sector with clean
chemical processes, as well as unique applications of
biotechnology, leveraging its rich natural resources.
| Services As People's Wealth| Q&A
What is the significance of the services sector in India's
Answer:The services sector has become a major part
of India's economy, encompassing all economic
activities outside agriculture and manufacturing. It
includes areas like tourism, information technology,
and financial services. Properly developing this
sector alongside agriculture and manufacturing is
crucial for generating employment and wealth for
Scan to Downloadthe people.
How has modernization impacted employment in
Answer:Modern agriculture, with its improved inputs and
mechanization, has led to decreased agricultural
employment, forcing many farm workers to migrate to urban
areas seeking better living standards. This shift highlights the
need for alternative employment opportunities in related or
Can India rely solely on the services sector for its
Answer:No, India cannot build its future solely on the
services sector. While it will be a major component of the
economy, India must also strengthen agriculture and
manufacturing to ensure food security and economic
What role does information technology play in the
Scan to Downloadservices sector?
Answer:Information technology enhances efficiency and
service in the services sector. It has transformed operations
such as railway ticketing and allowed for improved
agricultural advice through data management and
What challenges does India face in developing its services
Answer:The challenges include the need for higher skill
levels and knowledge among the workforce due to
technological advancements, the requirement for efficient
infrastructure, and addressing rural poverty to provide
What are some future sectors identified for growth within
Answer:Future sectors for growth include financial services,
marketing communication, technical and management
Scan to Downloadconsultancy, tourism, human resources development, and
security services, which are essential for supporting and
How can India ensure the development of human
resources for the services sector?
Answer:By investing in education and continuous skill
development, promoting entrepreneurship, and utilizing
modern technologies, India can enhance its human resource
capabilities needed for a robust services sector.
What innovative approaches can help improve marketing
communication services in India?
Answer:The focus on rural markets and adapting marketing
strategies to cater to changing consumer demands, like
quality and user-friendliness of products, can provide
significant opportunities for marketing communication
What is the importance of government administration in
Scan to Downloadthe services sector?
Answer:Government administration plays a vital role in
facilitating services by shifting from regulatory control to a
more service-oriented approach, promoting transparency and
efficiency in governance, which is crucial for establishing an
What potential does the tourism sector hold for India?
Answer:With a growing interest in cultural and
knowledge-oriented experiences among travelers, India can
capitalize on its diverse heritage and destinations to attract
more tourists, which could significantly contribute to the
| Strategic Industries| Q&A
What is the central theme of in 'India 2020' by
Answer:The central theme of is the
importance of developing strategic industries in
Scan to DownloadIndia that provide the nation with a decisive
advantage in various sectors, particularly focusing
on food security, economic security, and technology
How does A.P.J. Abdul Kalam define 'strategy' in the
Answer:Kalam defines strategy as the art of conducting a
campaign and executing a long-term plan of action in
business and politics, emphasizing that strategic industries
give India an advantage beyond military terms.
What role does food security play in India's overall
security according to the chapter?
Answer:Food security is depicted as crucial for the
well-being of the nation, especially for a large population
like India's, where consistent food supply despite external
What is economic security and why is it emphasized in
Scan to Downloadthe chapter?
Answer:Economic security refers to a steady rate of
economic growth that benefits the population. The chapter
emphasizes it as critical for a country to maintain stability
and growth, particularly against the backdrop of global
What challenges do developing countries face regarding
technology imports as discussed in the text?
Answer:Developing countries often pay high prices for
imported technology, which leads to an export-led economy
that pressures them to maintain a balance between imports
and exports, risking economic stability.
What are 'critical technologies' according to the National
Critical Technologies Panel, and can you list a few
Answer:Critical technologies are essential for national
defense, industrial competitiveness, and quality of life.
Scan to DownloadExamples include advanced microelectronics,
energy-efficient technologies, and improved military
Why is self-reliance in defense technology important for
India as described in the chapter?
Answer:Self-reliance is important to reduce dependency on
foreign technology, enhance national security, and allow
India to develop its defense capabilities independently,
fostering technological growth within the country.
What is the vision for the future of India's strategic
industries as provided by A.P.J. Abdul Kalam?
Answer:The vision is to develop a strong technological
foundation that allows India to compete globally, avoid past
errors, and create a brighter future for generations to come by
harnessing strategic technologies today.
How does the author propose India should approach
technology development in critical areas?
Scan to DownloadAnswer:The author suggests that India should focus on a few
crucial technologies, foster collaboration between R&D and
industries, and ensure strategic planning to build indigenous
What is suggested as a necessary step for achieving
technological capabilities in India, especially concerning
Answer:A concerted effort involving government R&D,
industries, and policy makers is suggested to enhance
indigenous production abilities and to attain at least 70%
self-reliance in defense supplies over time.
In what way does the chapter suggest that the success of
technological initiatives can spin off into commercial
Answer:The chapter indicates that advancements in crucial
technologies will not only bolster defense capabilities but
also create numerous commercial products and services that
can be marketed both domestically and internationally.
What does A.P.J. Abdul Kalam imply about the necessity
of developing advanced sensor technology in India?
Answer:Kalam implies that the development of advanced
sensor technology is vital for industrial, aerospace, and
health applications, and that India must establish a robust
national program for sensors to remain competitive globally.
How does position India's aspirations in
relation to developed nations regarding technological
Answer: positions India as having the potential to
achieve technological advancements comparable to
developed nations, contingent on a focused approach to
research, development, and strategic industry growth.
Why does Abdul Kalam emphasize the need for a
national mission on advanced sensors?
Answer:He emphasizes it to highlight the strategic
importance of sensors in various sectors, arguing that a
Scan to Downloadfocused national mission is essential for ensuring India's
industrial competitiveness and trade viability.
Scan to DownloadChapter 10 | Health Care for All| Q&A
What underlying issue does A.P.J. Abdul Kalam identify
regarding access to drinking water in India?
Answer:Kalam highlights the disparity among
different classes of Indians regarding access to clean
drinking water, pointing out that millions live
without reliable sources and often resort to polluted
How does Kalam suggest that health care systems can be
reformed to improve access for all Indians?
Answer:He emphasizes the need for better sanitation,
nutrition, and preventative healthcare measures, stating that
effective health education and access to affordable health
services are crucial for ensuring universal health coverage.
What role does technology play in addressing health care
challenges according to Kalam?
Answer:Kalam discusses innovations like desalination plants
Scan to Downloadand diagnostic technologies, arguing that they can
significantly improve health outcomes and must be utilized
effectively to meet the needs of the population.
Why does Kalam believe health care is a critical measure
of a society's progress?
Answer:He asserts that the ability to provide universal health
care reflects a society's commitment to the welfare of its
citizens and is essential for national pride and progress.
What does Kalam propose as immediate actions to tackle
major diseases by 2020?
Answer:He suggests prioritizing eradication efforts for
diseases like TB and AIDS, improving health education, and
ensuring timely access to vaccinations and healthcare
In what ways does Kalam suggest involving the youth in
the health care mission?
Answer:Kalam encourages youth to engage in health
Scan to Downloadmissions, emphasizing that they should remove pain and
suffering from people's lives through innovative thinking and
How does Kalam connect health issues to broader
socio-economic factors in India?
Answer:He notes that poverty limits health options for many,
indicating that a healthy population is necessary for a
productive workforce, implying that health care should be
viewed as an investment in the nation's future.
What is the significance of the quote from St Ignatius
Loyola that Kalam ends his chapter with?
Answer:The quote encapsulates the mission of health care
professionals to spread knowledge and compassion, inspiring
them to alleviate suffering and promote health across the
What are the broader implications of poor health care as
Scan to DownloadAnswer:Kalam argues that inadequate healthcare leads to a
cycle of poverty and disease, which holds back national
development and affects the quality of life for millions.
| The Enabling Infrastructure| Q&A
How can India overcome the challenges of poverty and
create a developed economy by 2020?
Answer:India can overcome poverty and build a
developed economy by leveraging its core
competencies across multiple sectors such as
agriculture, engineering, and biotechnology. By
ensuring connectivity between production centers
and markets, investing in infrastructure, and
enhancing value addition at each stage of
production, India can improve productivity and
create more economic opportunities. Furthermore,
innovation and the integration of advanced
technologies in agriculture and business will play a
crucial role in this transformation.
What role does infrastructure play in economic
Answer:Infrastructure is pivotal for economic connectivity as
it facilitates the movement of goods and services across
different regions. For example, efficient transport networks
(roadways, railways, waterways, and air transport) and
communication systems enable timely delivery of products,
reducing wastage and improving overall productivity. When
production centers are interconnected, it allows for value
addition and enables the economy to thrive.
Why is value addition important in the production
Answer:Value addition enhances the worth of a raw product
through processes such as sorting, packaging, and branding,
making it more appealing to consumers. For instance,
consistently delivering high-quality mangoes that meet
consumer expectations can justify higher prices. This not
Scan to Downloadonly boosts farmers' incomes but also strengthens the overall
economy by maximizing the potential of locally produced
How can technological advancements improve India's
Answer:Technological advancements such as computerized
inventory systems, electronic weighing machines, and
automated clearing processes can significantly improve
India's infrastructure, specifically in transportation and
logistics. These technologies minimize downtime, enhance
efficiency, and ensure the quality of goods during transit,
which ultimately leads to better service delivery and
What is the significance of telecommunication and
information technology in creating an enabling
Answer:Telecommunication and information technology are
crucial as they allow for the instant transfer of information
Scan to Downloadessential for business operations. A robust communication
network enhances logistics, improves service delivery, and
supports innovations across various sectors. Investing in
telecom infrastructure fosters economic development by
connecting rural and urban areas and facilitating access to
How does energy supply impact economic development?
Answer:Quality electric power is fundamental to the
functioning of modern economies. Interruptions or
inefficiencies in power supply can impede industrial
operations, lower productivity, and deter investments. By
ensuring consistent and quality electricity supply, India can
enhance operational efficiency across all sectors and provide
a conducive environment for economic growth.
What strategies can be implemented to improve India's
Answer:To improve power generation capacity, India should
Scan to Downloadinvest in renewable energy sources, enhance existing
infrastructure for better transmission, and increase efficiency
across power plants. Focusing on smaller, decentralized
power projects and refurbishing old stations can also yield
immediate results. Additionally, promoting nuclear power
and exploring cleaner technologies will be essential for
In what way can India's rural areas benefit from
Answer:Improved infrastructure in rural areas can facilitate
better access to markets, education, and healthcare, reducing
migration to urban centers. Establishing efficient transport
systems and reliable energy sources can encourage industries
to set up in these regions, enhancing local economies and
providing livelihoods, which in turn can lead to a more
balanced and inclusive national development.
What is the vision for renewable energy sources in India
and their potential impact?
Scan to DownloadAnswer:The vision for renewable energy sources like
biomass, wind, and solar is to reduce dependency on fossil
fuels and ensure sustainable energy supply. By harnessing
these technologies, India can empower underserved regions
with energy, promote economic development, and mitigate
environmental impacts. This not only addresses the
immediate energy needs but also contributes to long-term
How can India leverage its technological advancements to
become an IT superpower?
Answer:India can leverage its technological advancements by
enhancing IT education, promoting software development,
and fostering an entrepreneurial ecosystem. By removing
bureaucratic hurdles and encouraging private sector
participation, India can create a conducive environment for
IT innovation and expand its presence in the global market,
thus becoming a significant player in the global IT landscape.
| Realizing the Vision| Q&A
What is the significance of the word 'impossible' as
mentioned in the chapter?
Answer:The author emphasizes the need to use the
term 'impossible' with caution, as it can limit
potential and hinder progress. Instead of accepting
defeat, individuals should strive to find solutions and
Why does the chapter highlight the need for action in
India regarding various recommendations and reports?
Answer:The chapter criticizes the tendency to prioritize
media coverage over actual implementation of policies. It
stresses that while many reports exist, what is essential is
translating ideas into tangible actions to bring about real
How can the younger generation influence India's
development as mentioned in the chapter?
Answer:The youth, being a significant portion of India's
Scan to Downloadpopulation, possess the potential to drive innovation and
entrepreneurship. Their willingness to explore new avenues
of work fosters a dynamic environment for economic growth.
What is the vision for India by the year 2020 according to
Answer:The vision includes India becoming one of the five
largest economic powers, achieving self-reliance in national
security, and having a strong global political and economic
What role does the chapter suggest for industries in
realizing the vision for a developed India?
Answer:Industries are urged to take initiative by launching
specific projects that align with the vision, fostering
technological advancement and job creation, and leveraging
their capabilities for national progress.
What is the importance of infrastructure development
mentioned in the chapter?
Scan to DownloadAnswer:Infrastructure is crucial for economic growth. The
chapter highlights the need for improvements in energy,
transportation, and communication systems to facilitate
How does the chapter propose to address issues within the
Answer:The chapter encourages small-scale industries to
seek support from academic institutions for technological
advancements and to adapt their operations to be more
competitive in the market.
What message does the chapter convey about individual
contributions to national development?
Answer:Every individual, regardless of their role, is called to
take action towards national development. Small efforts
collectively contribute to significant change, reinforcing the
idea that 'many drops make a flood'.
How can NGOs contribute to the vision for India in 2020
Scan to Downloadas described in the chapter?
Answer:NGOs are encouraged to act as catalysts for change,
forging connections between various sectors and working on
projects that enhance health and education, ultimately
fostering a climate of national development.
Why does the chapter emphasize the need for
collaboration among various sectors like government,
Answer:Collaboration between these sectors is crucial for
creating a synergistic effect that accelerates action and
innovation, ensuring that different strengths and resources
are leveraged to meet the vision for India.
Scan to DownloadIndia 2020 Quiz and Test
Check the Correct Answer on Bookey Website
| Can India Become a Developed
Country?| Quiz and Test
1.India can become a developed country if it
achieves significant GDP growth and improves
2.The chapter claims that traditional economic metrics like
GDP and GNP are the only indicators of development.
3.Kalam argues that achieving developed status does not
need to consider the upliftment of all citizens.
| What other countries Envision for
Themselves| Quiz and Test
1.India has successfully carved its own path and
does not imitate the success of other nations.
2.Malaysia has adopted a strategic plan to become a fully
developed nation by 2020.
3.Japan has relied on the import of technology to drive its
Scan to DownloadChapter 3 | Evolution of Technology Vision 2020|
1.India established the Technology Information,
Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC) in
1988 to enhance self-reliance in technology.
2.The Technology Vision 2020 aimed to address India's
urgent needs, including eradicating poverty and ensuring
health and education for all, by enhancing dependency on
3.TIFAC's comprehensive assessment involved over 5,000
participants to identify critical sectors for technological
Scan to DownloadChapter 4 | Food, Agriculture and Processing| Quiz
1.Today, approximately 4% of India's population
lives below the poverty line, facing daily struggles
to secure basic food.
2.In the 1960s, India achieved self-sufficiency in food grains
before the 1970s due to improved crop strains.
3.By 2010, India expected to need to import no more than 5
million tons of food grains due to population changes.
| Materials and the Future| Quiz and Test
1.A.P.J. Abdul Kalam discusses the role of materials
as fully beneficial to human civilization and
2.India does not have any significant mineral resources for
material production according to Kalam.
3.Kalam believes that investments and innovations are
necessary for India to enhance its position in the global
| Chemicals Industries and Our Biological
Scan to DownloadWealth| Quiz and Test
1.The chemical industry has seen growth in India
since the establishment of its first petroleum
2.India's aspirations for its chemical industry include a focus
on sustainable practices and indigenous technology
3.There is no recognized value of ancient knowledge in
modern applications within the chemical industry.
Scan to DownloadChapter 7 | Manufacturing for the future| Quiz and
1.India has a rich history of traditional skills and
2.The Indian manufacturing sector does not need to
modernize small and medium enterprises because they face
3.By 2020, India aspires to become a global player in
| Services As People's Wealth| Quiz and
1.The services sector in India provides
approximately 40% of the country's GDP.
2.The agriculture sector contributes more than the services
sector to India's GDP.
3.Technological advancements have no significant impact on
employment in the services sector.
| Strategic Industries| Quiz and Test
1.India's indigenous defense production is currently
around 30%, and the goal is to raise it to 70%.
Scan to Download2.The Indian Space Program is entirely independent and does
not rely on any foreign components.
3.Economic security is solely determined by a country's
Scan to DownloadChapter 10 | Health Care for All| Quiz and Test
1.The chapter emphasizes the essential need for
universal health care in India, reflecting on
disparities in access to health services among
2.Improved sanitation facilities are not crucial for preventing
3.The chapter advocates for community participation as a key
strategy for tackling health disparities in India.
| The Enabling Infrastructure| Quiz and
1.The vision of a developed India aims to eradicate
2.Enhancing water transport would alleviate congestion in
3.Investments in renewable energy sources have no potential
| Realizing the Vision| Quiz and Test
1.India aims to be among the top five economic
Scan to Downloadpowers by the year 2020 according to the vision
outlined in 'India 2020'.
2.The primary focus of India's Vision 2020 is on enhancing
technology, but agriculture is not part of the plan at all.
3.The strategy for achieving India's Vision 2020 includes a
centralized approach to governance and implementation.

Take My Journey Beyond...
A Division of Ocean Books Pvt. Ltd.
4/19 Asaf Ali Road,
New Delhi-1 10 002 (INDIA)
Phs.: 01 1-23289555 23289666 23289777
YOU ARE BORN T O BLOSSOM
Take My Journey Beyond...
by APJ Abdul Kalam with Arun K Tiwari
APJ Abdul Kalam 2008
On July 5, 2006, I visited Berhampur in South Orissa to participate in the
Platinum Jubilee Celebrations of the City High School. The sight of
thousands of students, who came there braving stormy weather , warmed the
cockles of my heart. My friend, Kota Harinarayana, former chief of India' s
Light Combat Aircraft Development Programme, was with me. Kota was a
distinguished alumnus of this school and I asked him, "Did you ever think,
while you were a student here, that you would be developing a fighter
aircraft one day?" Laughing in his characteristic manner , Kota responded,
"I did not have any notion of fighter aircraft, but I was very certain that I
would achieve something significant one day ." Is there something latent in
a child that manifests later in life?
Perhaps yes. In 1941, when my science teacher Siva Subramania Iyer , of the
Rameshwaram Panchayat Board School, told me (a 10-year -old boy) that
how birds fly , he indeed opened an epiphany door of perception - an
explanation that eventually inspired me to fly in life, both literally and
figuratively . A primary teacher carries a pivotal responsibility - that of
providing a student with a complete set of precepts and practices for
progress towards the essence that a child carries forward from a long
Having walked on this planet for three quarters of a century and having
interacted with a million young students, I believe that education is indeed a
complete syner getic system encompassing multiple subsystems. We can
expand on the four components, which are integrated to form a connected
whole, with the whole being greater than the sum of the parts. Without these
four interconnected elements, no form of education will be able to lead a
student to the essence that is waiting to be manifested in the life ahead.
What are these elements that add up to holistic education?
The first phase comprises the practical, concrete and specific aspect of
learning. The second phase involves modes and methods. It will be
appropriate to say that most people manage to get to this point. It is in the
third phase, that one transcends the common plane of experience and moves
to a more sublime state of understanding. This phase, in essence, marks the
natural progression of an evolved soul. The fourth and final stage is an
expression of the philosophical and abstract dimension of human existence.
The nomenclature for these four stages varies from culture to culture.
There are four stages of life in the Hindu Society , namely: Brahmachari
(student), Grihastha (Householder), Vanaprastha (in semi-retirement) and
Sanyasi (the renounced one in full retirement). The Dharma (rightful
conduct) of each is dif ferent. The four stages may be said to represent
periods of Preparation, Production, Service and Departure. Hinduism does
not believe in an instructive doctrine. People do not have to be taught how
to be happy , how to be secure or how to attain the respect and admiration of
their friends and associates. Hindu thought suggests that there is a natural
progression of these values and one should grow towards more fundamental
interests embedded in every unique individual. This transition through
natural values has been institutionalised in the understanding of the four
stages of life known as Ashrama (abodes).
In Buddhism, the process enlightenment is explained in terms of four
successive steps. These are: Sotapanna (a partially-enlightened person, who
has eradicated the first three fetters of the mind, namely , self-view , sceptical
doubt and attachment to rites and rituals); Sakadagami (who still has
comparatively strong sensuous desires and ill-will); Anagami (who is
completely free from sensuous desires and ill-will); and Arahant (a person,
having removed all causes for future becoming, is not reborn after
biological death into any worldly realm).
Classical Western thought spells out four stages of human spiritual
development. The first stage is chaotic, disordered and reckless. One tends
to defy and disobey , and is unwilling to accept a will greater than his or her
own. Delinquents and mavericks are people who have never grown out of
this stage. The second stage is the stage at which a person has blind faith.
Once children have learnt to obey their parents, they reach this stage.
Many so-called religious people are essentially second stage people, in the
sense that they have blind faith in God, and do not question His existence.
With blind faith come humility and a willingness to obey and serve. The
majority of good law-abiding citizens never move out of the second stage.
The third stage is the stage of scientific scepticism and inquisitivity . In this
stage, a person will have faith in God but only after examination. People
working in scientific research belong to this stage. In the fourth stage, an
individual starts enjoying the mystery and beauty of Nature. While retaining
scepticism, he/she starts perceiving grand patterns in Nature. Their
religiousness and spirituality dif fer significantly from that of a second stage
person, in the sense that they do not accept things through blind faith but
out of genuine belief. The fourth stage people are, indeed, mystics.
In the Islamic tradition of Sufi mysticism or Tasawwuf, these four phases
are called Shariat, T areeqat, Ma'r efat and Haqeeqat, in ascending order .
Shariat constitutes the Rule Book or the code to be followed
unambiguously . Tareeqat forms the training, Ma'r efat the apparatus, so to
speak, while Haqeeqat is the summit.
The scheme of civil society depends on educating young people to become
enlightened citizens and adults who are responsible, thoughtful and
enterprising. This is neither a segment of the service industry nor a work of
the Government. It is, indeed, an intricate, challenging task requiring deep
understanding of ethical principles, moral values, political theory , aesthetics
Above all, it is an understanding of children, within them and in society .
The responsibility of this task can neither be spurn away on to the
Government nor can be bought of f by money .
Progress in every practical field depends upon having capacities that
schooling can educate. Education thus is a means to foster future
development and prosperity . One' s individual development and the capacity
to fulfil one' s own purposes can depend on an adequate preparation in
childhood. The better the foundation that is built, the more successful the
child will be. Simple basics in education can carry a child to greater heights.
A central tenet of education typically includes " the imparting of
knowledge ". At a very basic level, this purpose ultimately deals with the
nature, origin and scope of knowledge. But equally important is to analyse
the nature and variety of knowledge and how it relates to similar notions
such as truth and belief. We cannot af ford to educate our children on the
thoughts of other nations which will, in essence, forfeit the future of our
India has traditionally been a knowledge society . Great philosophers and
scholars have walked on this land. Indian tradition captured a widespread
spectrum of thoughts on the aim as well as methods of education. I found
two polar positions in the writings of Rabindranath Tagore and Jiddu
Krishnamurthy . Tagore said that culture is essential to nurture creativity like
a garden is for the flowers to bloom. Jiddu Krishnamurthy , on the other
hand, said culture destroys creativity . He sees genius as essentially a
rebellion. This book takes the middle ground. Underlying the significance
of traditional education that covers Shariat and Tareeqat phases which
cannot be debased or flouted, the book focuses on the spirit of Ma'r efat.
I have only written here what I have seen and felt first hand. More than five
decades of work on lar ge projects and opportunity to work under inspiring
leaders, brilliant colleagues and committed juniors taught me certain things
that I must share with posterity . My interpretation of Ma'r efat is bringing
about the cosmic ener gy into galvanising the process of manifestation of
one's genetically endowed excellence. I have experienced it many times at
crucial junctures of my work and I consider it as a step to progress beyond
The Indian tradition is replete with scores of such examples. The genius of
Thiruvalluvar , Kabir and Vivekananda is cosmic and has transcended
convention. Each, in his chosen way , in his own period, opened up new
vistas of thought and reflection. Then we had a great tradition of science,
particularly physics and mathematics, bringing in Noble prizes. However ,
today there is a trend emphasizing on acquiring service skills as compared
to research. The common trend today is to follow what is laid out rather
The wealth in the modern world comes from innovation. The emer ging field
of nanotechnology is indeed open to everyone for the purpose of
innovation. India can, indeed, be a world leader in this field. Information
technology has brought global recognition and respect to India. However ,
its fruits are limited to a few hundred thousand jobs and a portion of export
earnings. It must now go beyond the present scenario of providing service
This book is an attempt to induce young minds to realise that tremendous
resources and support systems exist in the field of education. These
systems, however , are unseen if untried.
The book contains many 'little' ideas I found fascinating during my
interaction with about a million school children over the last five years but
are rarely included in conventional academics, despite being indispensable.
I receive interesting questions on my website: Why do we divide a circle
into 360 degrees? When were the plus and minus signs introduced into
mathematics? What was all the fuss about when Copernicus discovered a
thousand years later what Aryabhatta recorded in the year 499?
We live in a terror induced era. There are people who believe they will earn
a honoured place in paradise by sacrificing themselves for a dream. Where
does this strange notion, paradise, come from? Is not the earth an abode
bestowed upon mankind? Is not every human being born destined to
blossom in this very life? This book does not provide the answer . Instead of
providing such answers, it asks a question - Why not? Are not all buds

The Wooing of Grain and Clay
Our education system should re- align itself at the earliest to meet the
needs of the present day challenges and be fully geared to participate in
societal transformation through innovation, which is the key to
Do we all have the ability to excel in life or is it reserved for only a few? Is
it the flash of insight or solution to a nagging problem that dif ferentiates
between the mundane and brilliant, ordinary and successful? Is it an earthly
norm or is it of the divine? Questions of a similar nature were hovering in
my mind when I went to Switzerland in October 2004 and sat on the chair
of Albert Einstein (1879-1955) in his study . Perhaps one might not have
imagined that Einstein would change the understanding of mankind when
he emer ged from the patent of fice in 1905, carrying his three brilliant
manuscripts.2 Einstein was blessed with success to become one of the most
outstanding scientists of the 20th century . But what about many other
innovative artists and scientists whose ideas were rejected by their
contemporaries - Nicolaus Copernicus (1473-1543), Galileo Galilei (1564-
1642), and even Charles Darwin (1809-1882). To say that Isaac Newton
(1643-1727) discovered gravity or that Thomas Alva Edison (1847-1931)
invented the electric bulb is a convenient simplification. What would have
happened to the extraordinary albeit untutored brilliance of Srinivas
Ramanujan (1887-1920) if it had not been articulated by British
mathematician C.H. Hardy (1877-1947)? Would not Newton' s or Edison' s
discoveries be inconceivable without the prior knowledge, the intellectual
and social network that stimulated their thinking, or an emer gent future that
needed their innovations? There is definitely originality in the individual,
but there is something more to captivate it.
This book is about this theme and the sub-routines around it. It is about the
guidance that is received from the Universe. When the conditions are just
right, solutions emer ge in a guided way . The idea that continents drift
around the planet on vast plates was considered preposterous for decades,
but now we predict earthquakes based on this knowledge3. Similarly , it was
not until William Harvey (1578-1657) that mankind knew about closed-
loop circulation of blood inside the body with the heart as a pump.
Based on my experience, I can say that there is almost always a period of
quiescence, a long spell of serenity and calm; a trial testing your patience,
intent and perseverance. Then, suddenly , the full-blown solution emer ges,
which was otherwise impossible to perceive as if from a divine source. In
Islamic parlance, the term used for this guidance is ma'r efat. In Eastern
religions, it is called bodhi (enlightenment). Western civilisation calls it
My exchanges with my contemporaries who know about it first hand led me
to reflect upon some great thoughts written in dif ferent ages. I visualise life
as a learning process. There is a gradual process of acquiring knowledge
and education which prepares an individual for life. Education encompasses
teaching and learning specific skills, and also something less tangible but
more profound: imparting good judgement ( viveka) and wisdom.Above all,
education is a vehicle of culture from generation to generation. A good
education system must, therefore, investigate the structure, materials and
the condition of cultural property ( sanskriti) . Moreover , the apparatus of
education also carries upon it the responsibility of identifying the extent and
cause of alteration and deterioration of culture. There have been phases of
great turmoil and upheaval in history marked by immense misery and
sufferings. There is no guarantee that there will be no further conflicts. Do
we have a safeguard? When there is a rift, liberal education provides
perspective and enables us to see life as a self-healing system4. Where do
To me, teaching people how to work out the truth for themselves - who
they are and how they are connected to their surroundings - is a fairly good
start for education. However , I realise that this is an unfashionable view in
our times of 'no absolute truths' - where all knowledge is incomplete,
evolving and relative to some cultural construction. The ignorance of those
who seek realities in words and other constructs of mind and erred wildly
therein is indeed beyond belief. Through this book, I want to put a
cautionary word to those who are governing education.
Italian philosopher Giovanni Battista Vico (1668-1744) distinguished three
'instincts' which, he said shaped history , and three 'punishments' that
shaped civilisation. The three instincts were (1) a belief in providence, (2)
the recognition of parenthood, and (3) the instinct to bury the dead, which
gave mankind institutions of religion, family and sepulchre. The three
punishments were (1) shame, (2) curiosity , and the (3) need to work.5
The wonderful things that are taught in our schools are indeed the work of
many generations, produced by enthusiastic ef fort and infinite labour in
every country of the world. All this is put into the hands of young students
as their inheritance in order that they may receive it, honour it and add to it
in good faith that one day , they can faithfully pass it on to their children. We
mortals do achieve immortality in the permanent things which we create in
common. If we always keep that in mind, we will find meaning in life and
work and acquire the right attitude towards other nations and ages.
My spiritual roots come from the multi-religious environment of
Rameswaram Island. I grew up amidst the sound of prayer calls from the
mosque, church bells and the temple music, all three interfused and yet
distinct. I lived in an island where everything - the sea, the moon, the
seagulls, the sand, the shells, the pilgrims, the porters, the coconut trees -
The concept of Tawhid is the central tenet of Islam . Each one of us is
guided by conditions in the environment. Nothing exists in isolation, be it a
celestial body , a particle of sand, a bird or a human being. There is a
purpose behind every entity . The concept of Tawhid explains an idea that
innovation arises not from the mind of a single individual but from the
syner gy of multiple sources.6 A genuinely creative accomplishment is
almost never the result of a sudden insight, a flash of lightning in the dark,
but comes after years of hard work.
This guidance is, indeed, a central source of meaning in our lives for several
reasons. Whatever I am, the language I speak, the values I hold dear , my
expression, my scientific understanding, the technology with which I
laboured, is the result of a long process of creation. So many individual
ingenuities were fused to create whatever I thought or did.
All my achievements for which I was recognised and rewarded were,
indeed, transmitted to me through learning. I wonder what I could have
learnt without inputs that were always available to me. I also felt that when
I was deeply involved with my work, I was living more fully than during
the periods of inaction and rest. My work provided me with a profound
sense of being part of an entity greater than myself. But can I then sum up
my life as my work?
There were several turning points in my life. These turning points telescope
years of hardship, doubt and confusion. It is not that my hard work was
always rewarded; the toil was redeemed by success. There are high points
for which I am known - SL V-3, Agni, Vision 2020, Pokharan tests and
perhaps Presidency - but hidden behind them was a great learning history ,
the sloppy , trial-and-error solutions to small problems. And there were so
many failures. It is impossible to understand what happens in the mind of
an individual when solutions finally arrive. I can only feel grateful to my
teachers who gave me an assured ground on which I stood firm to face all
that had come my way .
In September 2005, I visited Enchey Monastery in Sikkim. Later , I
interacted with the students at Sir Tashi Namgyal Senior Secondary School
in Gangtok. I discussed the education with the abbot of the monastery , who
I will teach you the truth and the path leading to the truth. It is pr oper for
you to doubt ... do not go by report ... do not go by tradition ... do not go by
hearsay .Human life is just like a mountain river , flowing far and swift,
taking everything along with it; ther e is no moment, no instant, no second
when it stops flowing, but it goes on flowing and continuing. Rely not on
theory , but on experience.7
In September 2006, I went to Beschi College in Dindigul to meet Rev . Fr.
Ladislaus Chinnathurai, who taught me Physics in 1950' s at St. Joseph' s
College, Trichchirapalli. Rev . Father told me that plants are shaped by
cultivation and men by education. We are born weak; we need strength; we
are born totally unprovided; we need aid; we are born with plain awareness;
we need judgement and discern. As we grow , education provides for all our
In Greek mythology , the human experience is, indeed, guided by entities.
There are three Muses: Aoide (voice or song), Melete (practice or occasion)
and Mneme (memory). The Greeks believed that Muses were the key to
good life and brought about both prosperity and friendship.
The causes and the crimes r elate;
What goddess was pr ovoked, and whence her hate.8
Imam Abu Hamid al-Gazzali (1058-1 111) wrote that it is human ef fort that
decides the value of one' s life:
Men ar e divided into
(1) those who take notice by themselves and understand
(2) those who do not understand except thr ough warning and instruction,
(3) those who benefit fr om neither , is like the division of the bosom of the
earth into thr ee parts:
(1) wher e water collects and incr eases till it bursts out by itself into springs
of living water ,
(2) wher e water collects but cannot be r eached without digging, and
(3) arid parts wher e not even digging will avail.9
Therefore, a combination of talent and ef fort determines the quality of
human life. The origin of talent and the source that inspire ef fort remains a
matter of mystery . Different cultures of fer dif ferent rationales.
It was during Renaissance in Europe that the term 'creativity' came to be
known to describe a sense of human independence of thought and freedom
of expression. Spanish writer Baltasar Gracian (1601-1658) described art as
the completion of nature. By the 18th century , the concept of creativity was
linked with the concept of imagination, the power and process of producing
mental images and ideas. In the 19th century , art alone was regarded as
creative. At the turn of the 20th century , creativity was generally taken as
the transference to the sciences of concepts proper to art.
Hungarian-born British Arthur Koestler (1905-1983) described three types
of creative individuals - the Artist, the Sage, and the Jester . He held that all
three elements were necessary in a creative process. Koestler introduced the
concept of analogical thinking; he termed it as bisociation . According to
this concept, creation of a new mental form is the result of the intersection
of two quite dif ferent frames of reference in the mind.10
In the Geneplore model of creativity11, developed a decade ago, it is held
that creativity is a generative process. There is an individual construct of
mental representations called pre-inventive structures, and there is an
exploratory phase where these structures are used to come up with hitherto
In the contemporary computer age, creativity is seen as a process of
iteration, an evolutionary computation. Generally , most creative techniques
use associations between the goals and the problem. The current state,
which may be an imperfect solution to the problem, is used to pick up
stimulants randomly , leading to creative solutions. Three of the best-known
techniques in vogue are brainstorming, lateral thinking and inventive
problem-solving. The shift from a mystical origin of creativity to an
iterative group activity is both evolutionary and revolutionary .
What is there which is revolutionary in the established evolutionary
trajectory of 5000 years? What is it that stands unique in the present age? I
believe it is expounding of knowledge. Knowledge is the most powerful
force at the moment that is leading human societies to newer forms of
existence. The Internet-driven society presents great opportunities: it can
mean newer employment possibilities, more fulfilling jobs, new tools for
education and training, easier access to public services, increased inclusion
of so far mar ginalised people or regions. It is revolutionary , but what is this
For the first time in Indian history , four generations of people now work
together . Each generation needs to know about it and others in order to
make age diversity strong instead of weak. I will start with my generation,
born before independence. Let me call it the Quiet Generation. We, as
children, were taught to rely on tried, true and tested ways of doing things.
After decades of working under command-and-control management, we
believed in dedication, commitment, loyalty and a hard day' s work. We
perceived the changes as more radical than any other generation and are
often sceptical about the changes that are imminent. Having amassed
invaluable knowledge, we have considerable experience and wisdom to
offer to the younger generations. If you are a member of the Quiet
Generation , you probably recognise that cutting-edge ideas and new
technologies will help you stay on top of your profession.
Avoid being stereotyped as the older person who stubbornly refuses to
change, but don' t be afraid to tap into your experience to discern what is
ephemeral and what is essential. If you are not confident of your
technological skills, identify techno-savvy younger colleagues and partner
with them for two-way coaching. You need their technological expertise and
they need your skills in areas such as listening, conflict resolution and
Making up about one-third of today' s workforce are the people born in
independent India. I call them Idealists. These people paid their dues and
climbed the ladder under the old rungs of establishment and now find
themselves operating under the new . They are learning from younger
generation that insist on work/life balance and being loyal to their families
is not being self-centred; rather it is a healthy attitude of responsibility to
themselves and others. After watching their juniors get hiring-bonuses and
choice schedules, many of them are adopting the free-agent mindset and
asking for the respect and recognition they deserve in return for their
If you are an Idealist, you may still have many productive work years ahead
of you. Continue to scout out the training, support and resource you need to
stay on top of your profession. Capitalise on the contributions you have
made and learn how to negotiate the best deals for yourself. Join the Quiets
in coaching and mentoring their younger generations. If you are in a
position of authority , the key to gaining credibility , trust and respect with
younger colleagues is to find and develop the leadership talent in your team.
People born after the Green Revolution of the late 1960s were the first
generation to recognise from day one that the dream of job security was a
myth. Their free-agent attitude was outlandish to loyal, hardworking Quiets
and Idealists, who considered them arrogant, disloyal slackers unwilling to
pay their dues. I call them Pushers. During the past decade, however ,
Pushers brought about the IT revolution and indeed proved themselves to
be valuable, creative contributors whose drive to get things done smarter ,
faster , safer and better has prompted workplace changes that every
Pushers demand more transparency . Under their pressure, pay-for -
performance became a reality in many or ganisations. If you are a Pusher ,
you may soon find yourself moving into positions of supervisory
responsibility and leadership. Your mandate is to manage others the way
you always wanted to be managed. Learn, practise and master the skills of
the coaching-style manager .
If management is not your goal, you still want to learn marketable skills
that will make you more valuable throughout your career . Prove your worth
by making significant contributions every day and get involved in ongoing
learning opportunities as a reward. Also, make sure your manager knows
you are open to tackling newer areas of responsibility . Some older
managers don' t understand that giving you more responsibility isn' t a
punishment - as it was for their generation - but an opportunity to prove
your worth and continue learning.
About a quarter of today' s workforce is Global in their attitudes. Mostly ,
the children of Idealists believe education is the key to their success;
technology is a transparent medium; diversity is given and social
responsibility is a business imperative. They are Global because certain
opportunities come from outside their country , particularly the United
States and also West Asia. This generation thrives on the adrenalin rush of
new challenges and new opportunities. Globals are highly paid due to their
potential to become the highest-producing workforce in Indian history .
Managers need to appreciate Globals' capabilities and help them test their
If you are a Global, look for mentors and coaches to serve as experienced
guides who can help you define what will make you succeed in your career
and in your life. Learn how to ask searching questions and listen patiently
to those who have walked the path you want to tread and who have the
competencies you would like to master . Look for lessons that af fect your
life; take them to heart and make people proud for having coached and
guided you. All generations must understand that in the 21st century
workplace, no needs or expectations of the generation have a monopoly .
Everyone must be flexible, techno-savvy and knowledgeable, focusing on
getting great work done every day . Consider yourself a free agent,
responsible for your life, career , family and contributions. The workplace, in
return, should recognise and reward your contributions accordingly .
So this is the soil, the ground for everyone. Educational levels are rising
rapidly; rates of technological innovation and application are accelerating;
cheaper and faster communication is dissolving physical and social barriers,
both within the country and internationally; information is being made
available in greater quantity and quality than ever before; and globalisation
is opening up new markets. All seeds must find a place to germinate in this
The clay is whitening in the windy light
Wher e the sparr ows ar e bathing.
Tomorr ow sur ely
The seed will go under the harr ow
The wooing of grain and clay .12
The contemporary Republic of India is a young developing nation, but our
people have a rich and illustrious history as one of the longest living
civilisations in the world. Chinese author Lin Yutang (1895-1976) wrote:
The contact with poets, for est saints and the best wits of the land, the
glimpse into the first awakening of India' s mind as it sear ched, at times
childishly and naively , at times with a deep intuition, but at all
times earnestly and passionately , for the spiritual truths and the meaning of
existence - this experience must be highly stimulating to anyone,
particularly because the Indian cultur e is so differ ent and, ther efore, has so
much to offer .13
To say that in 1947, India began to construct a modern nation would only be
serving the ego of political leadership. In reality , Indians began the process
of rediscovering their rich cultural and spiritual values that had formed the
foundation of India in the past. Mahatma Gandhi (1869-1948) was a living
representation of that process. Political leaders who eventually took char ge
of the independent nations of India and Pakistan emer ged from that process.
Sixty years of walking on the post-independence road, the Indian nation
faces a fork ahead: paraphrasing Scottish-American pastoral poet Robert
Frost (1874-1963), two roads diver ge ahead: (1) move on a business-as-
usual basis or (2) evolve best case scenarios; clearly specifying the policies
needed to move from one scenario to the other and also the hazards and
risks of sticking only to the business-as-usual path.
The rapid development of the Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) has brought about deep changes in our way of working and living,
particularly in the urban areas. As the widespread dif fusion of ICT is
accompanied by or ganisational, commercial, social and legal innovations,
low-cost information and ICT are in general use. The most valuable asset of
India is its human and social capital and the key factors to develop these
assets are knowledge and creativity .14 More than half of India lives in
villages and immense social and human capital is locked-up there for want
of physical and knowledge connectivity . I dream of rural connectivity .
Best scenario forming cannot be an economic exercise.15 It must include
aspirations of all walks of life of common people. Developing India cannot
be an anxious attempt to imitate and catch up with the developed countries.
An intelligent emulation must draw upon the discoveries and experiences of
others to address universal needs common to all human beings and all
societies. India with its rich cultural heritage and thousands of years of
history of civilisation need not aspire to become like one country or the
other . For India, realising the vision for 2020 is not an end in itself, but
rather an essential condition for allowing the seed-spirit of this country to
germinate in the Globalised clay of the 21st century world and flourish.
Reality puts boundaries on what is needed and what is useful. Nothing will
happen with the ideas unless there are selection mechanisms in place. You
get many new ideas, but no one knows which are good or bad, and you have
far more ideas than you can ever implement. Ultimately , you are just
alienating several people whose new ideas are not feasible, whose
aspirations are not finding place in your box. Roman Emperor Marcus
All things ar e woven together and the common bond is sacr ed, and scar cely
one thing is for eign to another , for they have been arranged together in
their places and together make the same or dered Universe. For there is one
Universe out of all, one God thr ough all, one substance and one law , one
common Reason of all intelligent cr eatur es and one T ruth. Fr equently
consider the connection of all things in the Universe. We should not say I am
an Athenian or I am a Roman but I am a citizen of the Universe.16
The proof of a mind' s vigour depends on its ability to work on the material
it meets with. A democracy can' t draw strength out of the backwardness of
its people. In fact, education is even more essential in a democratic society .
Civilisations are like a web; they are not statues but great creations of
A large number of youth approached me on the issue of reservations in
education and employment based on socio-economic realities. We, as a
society , need to distinguish between ideas that serve personal satisfaction
and fulfilment, and what implies wider societal acceptance.
The Indian youth, indeed, faces the twin problems of the provision of
quality education and unemployment to a lar ge number of people. There are
high aspirations to enter into institutions of higher learning such as
engineering, medical and specialised sciences. This entry is through a
vicious competition. A large number of students coming from backward
communities find themselves handicapped and complain of an uneven level
field. There is an ur gent need to open up more student vacancies in centres
of higher education as a mission. It requires a big investment but it can be
achieved through public-private partnerships.
I am working on a system of global human resource cadre. In the 21st
century , India needs a lar ge number of talented youth with higher education
for the task of knowledge acquisition, knowledge imparting, knowledge
creation and knowledge sharing. The universities should set up special
cadres to meet future demands, from both within and outside the country , of
skilled and qualified young men and women.
The metaphor of interaction between clay - the milieu of learning
opportunities - and grain - the potential of human mind - captures the
essence of the contemporary world. If we can unveil the spectacle of the
genius of a nation, we should find links between the common and
uncommon in every walk of life. Algerian-French writer Albert Camus
(1913-1960) wrote so aptly ,
"Don' t walk in fr ont of me; I may not follow . Don' t walk behind me; I may
not lead. Just walk beside me and be my friend."17

In the Childhood Garden
A nation is great, not because a few people are great, but because everyone
in the nation is great. I visualise a Web of Life holding together and
feeding the grass- root of our Society with nutrients of our technological
strength and industrial prosperity .18
When life is seen as a journey , it cannot be a race. A journey essentially
savours each step of the way . What does this mean? As one progresses from
the given starting conditions, each step involves growth. However , at each
step, there is also competition. The competitors come from dif ferent starting
conditions, mostly advantageous, and also the field is frequently uneven.
Sages cautioned against undermining your worth by comparing yourself
with others. Although comparing and contrasting is a valuable human skill
yet problems arise when a comparing mind is the only mode of perception
we access. If you perceive yourself better than others, pride sets in. If you
perceive yourself inferior to others, you lose self-esteem. When you do
something, you should burn yourself completely , like a good bonfire,
leaving no trace of yourself.19 Each one of us is special because we are
different. Whatever Nature creates is useful. Nature does not discriminate.
Outside the realm of human perception, the concept of better or worse is
Wise men cautioned against imitation. Amongst the three methods of
learning wisdom: (1) reflection, (2) experience, and (3) imitation,
Confucius (551-479 BC) termed reflection the noblest; experience the most
bitter and imitation the easiest. Do not set your goals by what other people
consider important. Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803-1882) said, "Ther e comes
a time in every man' s education when he arrives at the conviction that envy
is ignorance, that imitation is suicide, that he must take himself for better ,
or for worse as his portion." Only you know what is best for you. Do not
take for granted the things closest to your heart. Cling to them as you will to
your life, for without them, life is meaningless.
Scriptures celebrated perseverance. "I returned, and saw under the sun, that
the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the str ong, neither yet br ead to
the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men of
skill; but time and chance happen to them all." 20 The road to success is
dotted with many tempting parking places. Do not give up when you still
have something to give. Nothing is really over till the moment you stop
trying. It is a fragile thread that binds us to one another .
The learned demand courage. Do not be afraid to encounter risks. It is by
taking chances that we learn how to be brave. Mark Twain (1835-1910)
wrote, "Courage is resistance to fear , mastery of fear - not absence of
fear." American social activist, Clare Booth Luce (1903-1987), described
courage as the ladder on which all the other virtues mount. First female
pilot Amelia Earhart (1897-1937) defined that courage as the price that life
exacts for granting peace.
I remember a scene. I flew a Sukhoi-30 MKI fighter plane on June 8, 2006,
from Lohegaon airport near Pune. I was in the cockpit for 40 minutes with
Wing Commander Ajay Rathore as my co-pilot. When we disembarked,
someone asked me "Y ou are a courageous President. In spite of being 75,
did you not fear?" I said, "I did not have time to fear as I was continuously
busy with the control of the instruments of the aircraft." Courage is doing
nothing but an activity that you like. This is what good education teaches.
Above all, we must never dismiss our dreams. To be without dreams is to be
without hope. To be without hope is to be without purpose. Irish playwright
and essayist, Nobel Laureate, Geor ge Bernard Shaw (1856-1950),
wrote, "You see things; and you say , 'Why?' But I dr eam things that never
were; and I say , 'Why not?'" Another Irish Nobel Prize-winning poet,
William Butler Yeats (1865-1939), wrote,
"In dr eams begins r esponsibility ." 21 I believe that dreams transform into
thoughts and thoughts transform into actions.
I find it very rewarding when I reflect on what happens to exceptional
individuals from early childhood to old age. It is my belief that every life
carries possibilities with it. The dif ference comes from the way life is
encountered. I enjoy reading the biographies of successful people, for the
story of each life teaches me newer lessons. After examining in the first
chapter , a highly diverse socio-economic milieu where opportunities and
resources are competed fervently for , if not fiercely , this chapter will focus
In fact, the hardest teaching is received and the toughest examinations are
faced not in schools but, in the later years, out of schools. During the
student-life, lessons are given and then exams are taken. In working-life,
exams are first faced and lessons are then learnt. By observing successful
people, one can, indeed, envisage ways of breaking out from the routine,
from the constraints of genetic and social conditioning, to a fuller existence.
Does an individual resolution to shape life to suit one' s own goal instead of
letting external force rule one' s destiny? I read sometime back the example
of a bumblebee. The laws of aerodynamics as given in the textbooks prove
that the bumblebee should be incapable of flight, as it does not have the
capacity , in terms of wing size or beat per second, to achieve flight with the
degree of wing loading necessary . Not being aware that the scientists have
proved that it cannot fly , the bumblebee succeeds. One shouldn' t be
surprised that the results of the calculations don' t square with reality .
It took me a while to understand the bumblebee. The calculations which
purported to show that bumblebees cannot fly , indeed, are based upon a
simplified linear treatment of oscillating aerofoil. The method assumes
small amplitude oscillations without flow separation. This ignores the ef fect
of dynamic stall, an airflow separation inducing a lar ge vortex above the
wing, which briefly produces several times the lift of the aerofoil in regular
flight. More sophisticated aerodynamic analysis validates the bumblebee' s
flight because its wings encounter dynamic stall in every oscillation cycle.
Indeed, it can be concluded that the most obvious achievement of human
beings is that they crafted their own lives. And how they achieve it is
something worth knowing, because it can be applied to our own lives,
whether or not we are going to make a creative contribution.
This chapter presents an exploration of human potential that can be
expanded just as naturally as a seed germinates to become a plant. There is
increasing dialogue among religion, spirituality and science. Besides
excellence in science, technology and arts, there is tremendous human
potential for altruism, empathy and compassion waiting to manifest.22
There is nothing in the entire universe that exists without a purpose.23
Purpose is central to a human life.
The purpose of man' s existence is not eating and sensual enjoyment. The
holy Quran cautioned that fire will be the abode of those who enjoy
themselves and eat as cattle eat.24
The mind' s sensitivity to the meaning of life is, however , impaired by fixed
notions or perspectives on what it means to be a human being. There is an
infinite continuity of meaning that can be comprehended only by seeing
Unaware and almost every day , we read stories; we tell stories. Why is there
a widespread tendency to weave around stories from the bits and pieces of
life events? There is hardly any good story that can be called pure truth. The
same seems to be true for the records of lives of great people. They reflect
our psychological need more than reality . If someone becomes outstanding,
we want to believe that unmistakable signs of greatness were there early on,
for all to see. Whether it is the Buddha, Jesus, Edison, Einstein, Ramanujan
or M.S. Subbulakshmi, we are so eager to believe that genius must have
revealed itself in the earliest years of life.
As an example, a story Einstein liked to tell about his childhood was of a
'wonder ' he saw when he was four or five years old: a magnetic compass.
The invariable northward swing of the needle, guided by an invisible force,
profoundly impressed the child. The compass convinced him that there had
to be "something behind things, something deeply hidden." Even as a small
boy, Einstein was self-suf ficient and thoughtful.
Basing one' s judgement on a child' s early talents, it is impossible to tell, in
most cases, whether he or she will be creative or not. Few children do show
signs of extraordinary precocity early on in some domain or the other:
Subbulakshmi was an accomplished singer at an early age; Ramanujan' s
passion with numbers was evident even when he was a boy . Many great
scientists skipped grades in school and astonished their elders with the
nimbleness of their minds. But there were many other children whose early
promise fizzled out without leaving any trace in the history books. The
Indian Government conducts Science Talent Search in schools every year .
Only a few of them go on to become scientists.
Children can show tremendous talent, but they cannot be inventive because
invention involves changing a way of doing things, or a way of thinking.
For this, the first step is master the old ways of doing or thinking.
Subbulakshmi in her teens might have been as accomplished as many
singers alive, but she could not have changed the way people listened to
music until her way of singing was taken seriously . For this to happen, she
had to spend, at least, a decade mastering a new style of rendering
devotional music. Only then, she was able to produce a number of
convincing performances. In September 2003, I went to Alfred High School,
now known as Mahatma Gandhi High School, Rajkot. There I saw M.K.
Gandhi' s report card displayed with his other articles. There was nothing
spectacular in the report card. In fact, the man who eventually changed the
course of Indian history scored just 38 out of 100 in History in Class VIII
What if the real childhood accomplishments of great individuals are no
different from those of many others who never attain any distinction? The
mind will do its best to weave appealing stories to compensate. What is the
mechanism that generates such stories? Have we all not added imaginative
content in our past to make our own lives, or those of young children in
families, more interesting and more sensible?
When I visit schools, children ask me about my achievement during my
childhood. My childhood was, in reality , not very descriptive. It was just
like any other childhood of an islander boy . But children insist on a story .
The most imaginative I could be without altering the truth is to relate my
career in aeronautical engineering to my fifth standard teacher Siva
Subramanian Iyer who took me to the seashore to explain how birds fly .
It is not because I am consciously trying to overemphasise this little event.
It is because as one tells a tale over and over , the tendency is to highlight
what in hindsight we feel are the important parts. Also, there is an
unconscious attempt to eliminate details that contradict the point of the
story . Our sense of inner consistency demands it and the audience will also
appreciate the story more. With each explanation, my teacher 's visits to the
seashore along with the students becomes more remarkable. Perhaps, this is
the process by which myths are created. There is always a story presenting
the reality in an attractive form. Thus the apple that fell on Newton became
more famous than the theory of gravitation and Archimedes' cries of
'Eureka!' was accepted in all languages of the world. It is for the story that
as a child, Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790) tied a key bunch to a kite string,
flew it in a thunderstorm and watched the lightning strike it. As another
legend goes, young James Watt (1736-1819) watched how the lid was lifted
off the kettle under the force of steam.
I will upset many if I say that whether a great child will be a great
individual, is a big question. At best, we can ask what great individuals
were like when they were children, or what sorts of events shaped the early
lives of those who later accomplished something extraordinary .
When we look at what is known about the childhood of eminent people, it is
difficult to find any consistent pattern. Young Einstein was no prodigy .
Even a mature adult Indira Gandhi (1917-1984) was undermined before she
actually took over as India' s most commanding Prime Minister . Sarat
Chandra Chattopadhyay (1876-1938), Maqbool Fida Hussain (b. 1915) and
Amartya Sen (b. 1933) did not impress their elders as future geniuses.
Unlike Ravi Shankar (b. 1920) who displayed unusual gift in music before
his teens, A.R. (Allah Rakha) Rahman (b. 1966) blossomed only in his
twenties. The early years provide at best only glimpses of extraordinary
ability in the domain they eventually turned to.
If being a prodigy is not a requirement for later achievement, then what is
it? I believe, in most cases, it is the parents and primary school teachers
who are responsible for stimulating and directing the child' s interest. Later , a
mentor steps in. What do they exactly contribute? Let me share my personal
Strong parental influence is necessary for those children who are born into a
poor or socially mar ginal set-up. Lacking other advantages, such as good
schools and access to mentors, it is almost impossible to succeed without
parental support and guidance. My father 's stern ways of monitoring my
education as well as how I spent my leisure time were mainly responsible
for my strong personal regulation and self-confidence. The sense of self-
respect and discipline I absorbed at home stood me in good stead later on.
American teacher , Abraham Joshua Heschel (1907-1972), so aptly wrote,
"Self-r espect is the fruit of discipline; the sense of dignity gr ows with the
ability to say 'no' to oneself."
It is very hard for me to describe what my parents were in intellectual
terms. But one of the things, which I greatly appreciate, was that they were
very generous. They never denied us help. And they were more than ever
generous to me because I showed an aptitude for education. Later , my
sister , Zohra, would also 'act' mother and lend me a helping hand so that I
might opt for higher education by selling her jewellery for paying my fee.
My teacher , Iyadurai Solomon, was an ideal teacher for an eager young
mind who was uncertain of the possibilities and alternatives that lay before
him. He made us feel very comfortable in class with his warm and open-
minded attitude. He used to say that a good student could learn more from a
teacher than a poor student from even a skilled teacher . I have seen him
giving free tuitions to many students who were not doing well in the class.
Under his direction, I learnt that one could exercise enormous influence
over the events of one' s own life by making the right choices. He used to
say, "To succeed in life and achieve r esults, you must understand and
master thr ee mighty forces-desir e, belief and expectation." Iyadurai
Solomon, later , became a Rev . Father .
Possibly , the most important contribution of parents and early teachers is in
shaping character . Perhaps, the most important value parents can teach their
children is honesty .
In work situations, the mentor takes up the place of parents. I had been
extremely fortunate to have Brahm Prakash (1912-1984) who guided me.
He kindly mended my ruthless and antagonistic ways of working. I believe
that the responsibility of an authentic mentor is not only to be honest to
himself but also to make sure of the honesty of his/her pupil. My
connotation of 'honesty' here means authenticity in one' s work. How can
You must criticise yourself; you must consider everything that may
contradict what you think, and you must never conceal an error . The whole
atmosphere should nurture this spirit. Later , when you are head of a lab or
an institute, you must make a great ef fort to help those who are honest and
not merely career -oriented. This is the most important task that a leader has.
It is absolutely fundamental. I want to place the origin of these qualities in
my own working to the mentoring of Brahm Prakash.
Our efforts will kindle their seeking mind then at last
We can give them the act - so sublime!
Be patient O my dear!
Give not into fear .
Give not in to concern, for what is so near .25
Who amongst us does not want to be successful in whatever is done? Each
one of us enjoys the respect that goes with success and the sense of
satisfaction that accompanies accomplishment. It is my firm belief that the
foundation of a successful life rests on the triad of parents, teachers and
mentors. What can you get of life, if you can' t respect your parents,
teachers and mentors? Of course, respect does not mean blind obedience.
Free and honest thinking has no place for contradiction. However ,
contradiction should not debase into disrespectful arrogance.
I believe childhood is an indivisible part of one' s destiny . I attach enormous
importance to my early memories. When I look back, it is inevitable that
what we see now is coloured by what happened in the years in between. A
person, who is relatively happy and content in the present, may remember
more sunshine than there actually was. Similarly , someone wounded by life
may project more misery into the past. I feel, most of the adults who feel
positively about themselves describe their childhood in most favourable
terms. Though it remains unclear which is the cause and which is the ef fect.
Even if the family and school were not a source of inspiration, when a child
grows into teenage and enters college, there is always a teacher who arrives
to awaken, sustain, or direct his or her interest. I am yet to find a person
who cannot gratefully remember , at least, one teacher in college. My
teachers at St. Joseph' s College loaned their books to me and gave me
tutorials and special tests to shape my abilities. How do we describe a good
In Buddhism, the teacher occupies the centre stage. The teacher must teach
with the thought, "I will speak step-by-step." The teacher must teach with
the thought, "I will speak explaining the sequence of cause and ef fect." The
teacher must teach with the thought, "I will speak out of compassion." The
teacher must teach with the thought, "I will speak not for the purpose of
material reward." The teacher must teach with the thought, "I will speak
without disparaging myself or others."26
Imam al-Gazzali regards the first duty of a teacher to accept the child
unconditionally as his own. He quotes the saying of the Prophet of Islam: "I
am to you like a father who desires to save his child from the fires of hell,
which is more important than any of the ef forts of parents to save their
children from the fires of the earth."27
We can see that a teacher 's concern is not only to achieve immediate and
short-term success, such as good examination results, but to inculcate
values which are formative, more permanent and will help his student to
excel in this and the after -life. Imam al-Gazzali explains that education is a
journey to Allah .
Another important duty is that the teacher should adapt the teaching to the
child' s level of intelligence and needs. Let me appeal to our teachers - do
not neglect this basic duty and leave the innocent little children to grope
helplessly in the dark as they struggle to understand the work which is
above their present level of understanding.
This duty further implies that the teacher must know his children intimately
and understand their problems so that he may help them overcome or cope
Closely related to this duty is the teacher 's duty to teach in such a manner
that befits his dignity , authority and honour that the parents and children
bestow on him. Let us remember that often it is not what we teach our
children that will influence them, but how we teach it. Be patient when you
wait for the slowest child to arrive at an answer . Show humility when you
say to a child, "I don' t know the answer; let us look it up!" It is the
encouragement that you of fer the slower child and the generous praise when
he can master even a small part of the work! Are not we, as parents and
teachers, the mirrors to our children? The dedicated teacher , according to
Imam al-Gazzali, is like the wick of a lamp which burns itself out in giving
light to others.26 Dr. S. Radhakrishnan (1888-1975) saw a teacher as a
guide, "In our life, the direction and goal of which is lost in the infinite."
On Teacher 's Day 2006, I administered a 10-point oath during the
presentation of National awards to meritorious teachers. The oath goes like
this: (1) First and foremost, I will love teaching. Teaching will be my soul.
Teaching will be my life' s mission; (2) I realise by being a teacher , I am
making an important contribution to the ef forts of national development; (3)
I realise that I am responsible not only for shaping students but also for
igniting youth who are the most powerful resource under the earth, on the
earth and above the earth; (4) I will consider myself to be a great teacher
only when I am capable of elevating the average student to the high
performance and when no student is left out as a non-performer; (5) I will
organise and conduct my life, in such a way that my life itself is a message
for my students; (6) I will encourage my students to ask questions and to
seek answers in order to develop the spirit of enquiry , and they blossom into
creative enlightened citizens; (7) I will treat all the students equally and will
not support any dif ferentiation on account of religion, community or
language; (8) I will continuously build my own capacities in teaching so
that I may impart quality education to my students; (9) I will constantly
endeavour to fill my mind, with great thoughts and spread the nobility in
thinking and action among my students; and (10) I will always celebrate the
success of my students.
If so much is expected of the teacher in the educational situation, how much
more is not expected of the student? The student' s first duty is to develop
noble qualities such as truthfulness, sincerity , piety and humility .This, Imam
al-Gazzali calls "the adornment and beautification of the inner self." With a
beautiful inner self, with a pure heart, with noble intentions, we approach
Like the teacher , a student must, at all times, be humble. As long as students
are proud and arrogant, and as long as they are filled with self-glory , they
will not hear or see anything else. Even the teacher 's guidance will mean
nothing to them. I read somewhere:
"Knowledge humbles the haughty youth,
As the flood washes away the hill."
Humility is the key to successful learning. Yes, but don' t become so
submissive to your teachers that you are too meek to ask questions in order
to improve your understanding. Your teachers would expect you to question
them, to participate actively and to contribute to the lessons.
It is the right of every student to get up in the classroom and be heard. It is
the students' right to contribute to the or ganisation of the college through
student councils and other such bodies. It is their right to help decide what
they need to know , a privilege that cannot be denied to them.
Similarly , it is their duty to respect the authority and dignity of the teacher
as extension of their parents.
Hazrat Inayat Khan28 expressed it this way:
"Knowledge will surr ender nothing to man
Unless man surr enders his all to it."
Talented teenagers have some special obstacles to surmount. Popularity is a
big trap in teenage. None of the creative people I know recall being popular
in their adolescence. Some of them told me that they , indeed, had a
reasonably troubled time getting along with their friends. Marginality - the
feeling of being on the outside, of being dif ferent, of observing with
detachment the strange rituals of one' s peers - appears a common theme. I
was a mar ginal myself, mar ginal to the upper class, mar ginal to my school
friends, and so on, but also mar ginal because of my views. At times, I was
even insulted. Rumi' s words inspired me: If an ant seeks the rank of
Solomon, don' t smile contemptuously upon its quest. Everything you possess
of skill, and wealth and handicraft, wasn' t it first merely a thought and a
There are multiple threads of continuity from childhood to adulthood. In
some cases, the continuity of interest from childhood to later life is direct;
in others, it is strangely convoluted. For each creative person, whose life
seems like a seamless unfolding from childhood into old age, or whose
interests seem preordained even before birth, there is another whose later
career seems to be the product of chance or of an interest that appears
seemingly out of nowhere long after the early years have past.
What shapes creative lives? We, in India, are used to take life in a fatalistic
fashion. But reflecting on the lives of creative individuals brings out a
different set of possibilities. If the future is indeed determined by the past,
we should be able to see clearer patterns which are, by and lar ge, absent.
There is a great variety of paths that led people to eminence. It seems to me
that men and women are not shaped, once and for all, either by their genes
or by the events of early life. Rather , as they moved along with time, being
bombarded by external events, encountering good and bad people, good and
bad breaks, they had to make do with whatever came to hand. Instead of
being shaped by events, they shape events to suit their purposes.
So, it appears that a creative life is determined, but what determines it is not
the genes, family , school, or even college. There is a will moving across
time and a fierce determination to succeed. Of course, this still leaves the
question - so where does this will and determination come from? Is it
genetically programmed sensitivity , stimulating early experiences? Is not
the teacher stepping into the Universe to of fer guidance?
In India' s great epic, the Mahabharata , as the battle is about to begin,
Arjuna, himself an acclaimed warrior , wonders how he could kill his own
blood relatives with whom he had grown up as a child. He puts the battle on
hold and begins a conversation with Lord Krishna. The Bhagavad-Gita
(The Song of God) begins here and ends with Lord Krishna convincing
Arjuna that in the grand scheme of things, he is only a pawn. The best he
could do is by doing his duty and not question God' s will.
The law of universal causality represents the core of Indian spirituality . It
connects man with the Cosmos and fixes the responsibility of every action
performed. There is a concept of transmigration - to move from one body to
another after death - indefinitely till the consequence of every misdeed is
experienced. The eternal soul, moving from body to body , ascends or
descends the ladder of a given hierarchy , conditioned on the nature of one' s
own work of life or life deeds. Even if we choose not to know precisely
from where we are ascending or descending, what is important is to feel the
urge when it arises. Recognise the guidance when it shows itself, follow it
and put in our best ef forts.

The Treble of Heaven's Harmony
Conscience is the light of the Soul that burns within that burns within the
chambers of the chambers of heart.30
Success and struggle are, indeed, synonymous to life. Austrian neurologist
and the founder of the Psychoanalytic School of Psychology , Sigmund
Freud (1856- 1939), wrote, "One day , in r etrospect, the years of struggle
will strike you as the most beautiful." To progress in life, one must make a
tremendous effort to fight all the stumbling blocks that come across one' s
way. It is like climbing a flight of stairs or walking up a hill, which takes all
of one' s ener gy and ef fort. A strenuous journey to the pinnacle: the
exhilaration is unsurpassable. Emily Dickinson (1830-1886) captured this
Success is counted sweetest
By those who ne'er succeed.
To compr ehend a nectar
Requir es sor est need.31
I have always appreciated life. I hold it sacred. Just as in any traditional
Indian joint family , my early tutelage to life and learning was not only from
my parents but from the elders at home. Later , my teacher , Siva
Subramanian Iyer , and my mentor , Brahm Prakash, continued to be my
support. They all were very good people, with incredible hearts and spirits
and an endless capacity to love and understand. They were completely
selfless and generous. There was a strange confidence in the way they lived.
Each one of them, in his or her own unique way , trusted that the path of life
was leading his/ her to his/her destiny . They trusted the Universe and
believed that it governed all.
Trusting the universe means living with a faith that no matter how much
pain you are in, or how out of control everything around you appears, all
the happenings are for a reason. It is about believing in a higher purpose of
life. I have seen many people moving through life, oblivious to the beauty
that is profuse all around. William Wordsworth (1770-1850) wrote:
Earth has not anything to show mor e fair:
Dull would he be of soul who could pass by
A sight so touching in its majesty .32
Often situations in life appear insurmountable and the easiest thing to do is
give up. I, too, have had my fair share of ups and downs but recollect only a
few that were insurmountable.
In 1972, both Satish Dhawan and Brahm Prakash called me. Chairman
Dhawan said, "I am going to give you a very important project. You will be
the Project Director for the SL V-3.33 You will be provided the required
budget. The project will be completed in seven years.
All manpower will be available to you from the or ganisation - from all the
centres. We all will work together as a team. I will report to you." I was
surprised that he selected me for this position amongst the many senior
I wondered, "How am I going to do it?" Then Satish Dhawan gave me a
piece of advice that I always remembered. "Kalam," he said, "if one does
not venture out, he stays in his shell. When we take up a mission or task,
problems are bound to arise. You must become the master of the problem,
defeat that problem and succeed."
Seven years later , in August 1979, it was the countdown for the satellite
launch vehicle. We all were in Sriharikota. During the final stages, we
turned to auto-pilot mode. The computers warned us not to launch. I
consulted with the other experts. They said, "Don' t worry; launch it."
Functioning as Mission Director , I bypassed the computer and took over the
manual launch. The vehicle failed and sank into the Bay of Bengal. The
Press asked how I could put Rs. 20 crore (200 million) into the Bay of
It was the advice of Satish Dhawan combined with the spiritual strength
inculcated from my family that helped me emer ge out of the failure. Instead
of brooding over the mishap, we turned our ener gy to conduct a root cause
analysis in a very objective manner . Then M.R. Kurup, the Chairman of the
Failure Analysis Board, along with G. Madhavan Nair as member -secretary ,
meticulously interviewed more than 125 scientists and staf f, and analysed
over 200 data records.
Finally , we could locate the fault to the air -conditioning plant. During the
period before the launch, dust had entered the valve system of the control
power plant, resulting in its improper functioning. After this incident, we
ensured that all our systems went through rigorous quality checks. Not only
could we fix the technical problem but we were also able to keep the morale
of the scientists high, so much so that it enabled me to go for the next
launch within one year . We succeeded in that attempt.
Another problem arose in 1989. The 'Agni launch'34
was scheduled for April 20. When we were at T-14 second, the computer
signalled 'hold', indicating that one of the instruments was functioning
erratically . By that time, the umbilical connector , giving power to the
missile on the launch pad, was disconnected. The missile electronic system
was operating on batteries inside the subsystems.
We rechar ged them.
We got the missile on the launch pad on May 1. But again, during the
automatic computer check-out period at T-10 second, a 'hold' command
was signalled. One of the control components was malfunctioning. The
launch had to be aborted again. There was confusion all around, not only in
the public domain but also in my laboratory at Hyderabad.
I invited the entire community of Defence Research & Development
Laboratory (DRDL) and Research Centre Imarat (RCI) working on the
missile projects. There were 2000 people standing at the main gate of
DRDL that had seemed more like a public rally . I still recollect myself
saying, "V ery rarely does a laboratory get an opportunity to develop a
system like 'Agni'. A great opportunity came our way . Naturally , major
opportunities are accompanied by equally major challenges. We will not
give up and we will not allow the problem to defeat us. The country does
not deserve anything less than success from us. Let us aim for success." I
found myself telling, "I promise you, we will be back after successfully
launching 'Agni' before the end of this month." Was it a ma'r efat? It
eventually happened on May 22.
I want to reassure young children that all the pain that they inevitably go
through in life is to allow them to evolve into accomplished individuals;
develop a deeper understanding of who they are and where they belong to.
Life is less stressful when we trust that we are always being guided for our
William Tiller, promoter of the concept 'subtle ener gies', writes that the
Universe has a plan for our development and 'tilts' the statistics so that
events and opportunities may be caused to appear in our paths. It is,
therefore, sensible to do what is immediately at one' s hand; do it with all of
one's might and do it joyfully . Then move on without lingering attachments,
with the confidence that the unfolding prospects will lead to our greater
growth. According to Tiller, it is all right to stumble because such events
show us what we still have to learn.35
A youth comes out of college with dreams and goals. When I graduated as
an aeronautical engineer , I had a dream of flying a fighter aircraft. I
appeared for entry into the Air Force, but failed to get in and had
experienced times of insecurity and uncertainty concerning my future, and
my place in this world. However , something deep within me always
brought me comfort in times of despair . I must share with my readers this
concept of the 'inner sanctuary'.
I always felt that there was a vast inner space in the mind. I often dwelt in
this inner space and visualised how I would like my life to be, the places
that I wanted to visit, and the person I wished to be. I would imagine myself
achieve all that I wanted. This place to me was more real than even the
immediate world around. It was like a secret treasure chest within, the place
that you hold dear to your heart; the place where you hold your innermost
dreams and desires36 William Wordsworth (1770-1850) so beautifully
For oft, when on my couch I lie
In vacant or in pensive mood,
They flash upon that inwar d eye
Which is the bliss of solitude.37
How does one find this treasure chest? Where is the key? Will finding the
key propel me in the direction of my dreams, and allow me to realise and
achieve them as a matter of luck or chance? Nobel Prize winner in
Literature, Polish poetess, Wislawa Szymborska (b. 1923), writes:
There is so much everything
That nothing is hidden quite nicely .38
When we say that something new has been found or a long-felt need has
been accomplished, it is, indeed, the culmination of a process that started
long ago, not withstanding our awareness. Almost every invention including
the most celebrated ones eventually appears as a projection of one' s thought
Most achievements are a part of long-term commitment to a domain of
interest. Every child is endowed with a natural frequency that takes his/her
attention to certain areas. A certain interest starts building up somewhere in
childhood, proceeds through schools and continues during university , a
research laboratory , an artist' s studio, a writer 's table, or a business
The possibilities are enormous; occupational paths vary a great deal
depending on the domain in which a person is active. The career of a poet is
very dif ferent from that of a nuclear -physicist or a cardiologist or the CEO
of a financial firm. Moreover , the career lines of men and women can vary a
great deal even within the same sub-field. It is important to understand the
knowledge-process that spans years, decades and even lifetimes.
British philosopher , Leslie J. Walker (1877-1958), described knowledge as
a state of mind. He said, "A person initially starts with ignorance. The first
step demands some knowledge which the person, all things considered,
ought to possess. A surgeon need not know how 'eccentric' a steam engine
is, but he ought to know what a 'tourniquet' is. In itself, ignorance is
Next to ignorance, comes doubt. Doubt is the negation of a state of
consciousness. It is simply the absence of belief and again is nothing by
itself. The first step out of doubt may be called suspicion, which is
described as so faint an inclination to yield in one direction, which is not yet
apparent. A good analogy is elastic strain before the plastic reformation
occurs in a structural element. There is an assent to the presence of load;
though the element has not given into the load.
An opinion is expressed when an assent is given to the suspicion, though as
to a mere probability and only under restriction. When a thing is held as a
probable opinion or as certain, it becomes belief. It must not be confused
Knowledge is a certainty founded upon insight and belief is a certainty
founded upon feeling. Belief is the primary condition of knowledge but not
knowledge by itself. To believe that the sky is blue is to think that the
proposition, "The sky is blue", is true. Most knowledgeable people indeed
operate on beliefs. An assurance is said to be either knowledge or a belief,
depending upon which of the two predominates.39
There are broadly two types of work ethos. One is the classical type where
the career lines are laid out and one just needs to move along that said path.
The other is of creative individuals who need to rediscover their work
Most of us join an or ganisation at the entry level, perform a prescribed role
for a number of years and leave at a higher level. A worker may start as a
toolmaker and leave as a foreman; a teacher may teach for thirty years and
become a principal; a soldier may become a ser geant; a young lawyer may
end up as a partner of the firm, and so forth. These rules are relatively fixed,
and we fit into them. I joined Defence Research & Development
Organisation (DRDO) as a Senior Scientific Assistant and retired 40 years
later as its chief, of course, with a twenty-year sojourn at Indian Space
Research Or ganisation (ISRO). I merely followed career lines that were laid
On the other hand, creative individuals usually are forced to invent on the
job they will be doing all through their lives. It is the group of these
individuals who take a dif ferent path and discover a new dimension of
creative ener gy. One could not have been a psychoanalyst before Freud, an
aeronautical engineer before the Wright brothers, an electrician before
Edison. Before Jamshedji Tata (1839-1904), there was no steel-making in
India, and there was no space research before Vikram Sarabhai (1919-
1971). I personally know two men who excelled outside their 'spheres'.
Verghese Kurien (b. 1921), mechanical engineer , created the milk co-
operative movement in India working with farmers; and cardiologists B.
Soma Raju (b. 1946) made a coronary stent with defence scientists. These
individuals not only discovered new ways of thinking and of doing things
but also became the first practitioners in the domains they discovered and
made it possible for others to have jobs and careers in the new enterprises.
Pioneers must create a field that will nurture their ideas, as new ideas
cannot survive for long without finding acceptance in the culture of the day .
Kurien had to convince farmers about his ideas and Soma Raju had to
attract engineers to his work, because careers can take place only within
fields. If a person wants to have a career in a field that does not exist, he or
she must invent it.
And that is what people, who create new domains, do. What happens to
writers, musicians and artists? These are some of the oldest professions. So,
it must be wrong to claim that a creative poet creates the role of a poet.
There is a very real sense in which this is actually true.
Each poet, musician, or artist, who leaves an impression, must find a way to
write, compose, or paint like no one has done before. While the role of
artists is an old one, the substance of what they do is unprecedented. Two
examples, one from the sciences and one from the arts, that I came across,
illustrate what is involved in creating creative careers.
We were working with high strength composite materials to make missile
heat shield when orthopaedic sur geon, B.N. Prasad, approached me to
develop Floor Reaction Orthosis, a prosthesis with which polio-af fected
children could walk more conveniently and comfortably .Father Felix started
the first school for the mentally retarded at Changanacherry in Kottayam
district in Kerala and developed new ways of coping with disability with a
new kind of dance training.
Work alone remains after the death of any individual. The present
generations know Ramakrishna Paramhans, Dayanand Saraswati and
Aurobindo Ghosh when young children go to study in the schools founded
by them, in the past. To mortals like us, immortality can become a reality
only through the significant work we leave behind.
Immortality is, indeed, a genetically carried delusion. For some strange
reason, no one wants to die. It is much easier to come to terms with one' s
mortality when one knows that parts of one will continue to live on after
one's death in the form of his/her work of lasting value.
There is often a presumption that only one way out of two possible ways of
living after death - physical in the form of children or mental in the form of
books - is permissible. The Romans had a saying - libri aut liberi (books
or children). It refers to how dif ficult it was to have it both ways. In fact, in
many cultures, it has been the case that those who wrote the books - the
monks in early Christendom, the Tibetan lamas, or Buddhist monks and
Sufi' s - were not supposed to have married life and children. I feel that I
unconsciously followed this tradition.
The second most potent desire after immortality is to lead. Man is bestowed
with a trait to preside over other creatures on the earth. This trait
overdeveloped into a desire to lead fellow beings and govern their af fairs.
One can govern oneself, or one can govern the whole earth. In between, we
may find leaders who operate primarily within families, communities, states
and nations. Intertwined with such categories, and overlapping them, we
find religious leaders, workplace leaders such as executives, of ficers,
managers, team-leaders, supervisors and leaders of voluntary associations.
Though there are many stories to make us believe that charisma and
personality worked miracles, most leaders operate within a structure of
supporters and executive agents who carry out and monitor the expressed or
filtered-down will of the leader . This undercutting of the importance of
leadership may serve as a reminder of the existence of the follower .
Leading and managing are two dif ferent ways of or ganising people. The
manager uses a formal, rational method, while the leader uses passion and
stirs emotions. A leader is someone whom people naturally follow by
choice, whereas a manager must be obeyed. A manager may only have
obtained his position of authority through time and loyalty given and not as
a result of his leadership qualities. A leader may have no or ganisational
skills, but his vision unites people.
Leaders are innately observant and sensitive people. They know their team
and develop mutual confidence within it. Leaders stand out by being
different. They question assumption and are suspicious of tradition. They
seek the truth and make decisions based on facts.
In modern dynamic environments, formal bureaucratic or ganisations have
become less common because of their inability to deal with rapidly
changing circumstances. Most modern business or ganisations and some
government departments indeed encourage what they see as leadership
skills and reward identified potential leaders with promotions. To stress this
point, we can examine the success story of Bill Gates. He founded
Microsoft as the 21st century or ganisation, and runs it with a sense of vision
20 years ahead of his time. For a vision to succeed, it must be shared.
Today , 76,000 workforce in 102 countries share Bill Gates' vision to create
an annual revenue of over US$44 billion. How is it done?
An ef fective leader unites followers in a shared vision that will improve an
organisation and the society at lar ge.Good leadership must deliver 'true'
value. This can happen only through integrity and trust. Thus,
transformational leadership is dif ferent from a transactional leadership
which builds power by doing whatever that results in more followers.
The metaphor of an orchestra conductor can best describe the leadership
process. An ef fective leader resembles an orchestra conductor in many
ways. The leader gets a group of potentially diverse and talented people -
many of whom have strong personalities - to work together towards a
common goal. The ef ficiency of the orchestra just as in leadership will best
be represented if the conductor can harness and blend all the gifts his or her
players possess if the players accept the degree of creative expression they
have. The conductor or leader must have a strong determining influence on
The scientific leadership theory40 identifies six critical capabilities that are
grouped under Leadership Capital and four capacities termed Leadership
conditions. The six critical Leadership Capital capacities are: (1) vision, (2)
values, (3) wisdom, (4) courage, (5) trust, and (6) expression. The four vital
Leadership conditions necessary for these capacities to make a dif ference
are: (1) a place where the leader can hold sway , (2) a period that calls for
his or her leadership, (3) a position that conveys leadership authority , and
(4) people who are ready for leadership.
Ideal leadership defines a leader as one who moves his or her or ganisation
forward in a positive direction. Given the right conditions, combined with
adequate capital, the result is favourable not only to the particular
organisation, but also to the society at lar ge.
While it is easy for every single business enterprise to quantify its own
profits, who will want to quantify the profits of the society at lar ge? I was
studying the classic 'Dialogues of Plato' , where Plato (427- 347 BC) brings
out the concept that "our aim in founding the State was not the
disproportionate happiness of any one class, but the greatest happiness of
the whole". Similarly , during the same period, Tamil poet, Saint
Thiruvalluvar , said, "Pini inmai Selvam V ilaivinbam Emam, aniyenba
Nattirku vainthu," that is, "The important elements that constitute a nation
are: being disease free, wealth, high productivity , harmonious living and
strong defence." We have to find how we can provide all these elements to
all the citizens of the nation on an equitable basis for happiness. This will
result in a peaceful world. What brings happiness to the human beings?
During the year 2003, I visited a Buddhist monastery at Tawang in
Arunachal Pradesh for a day . I found that all the villagers were radiatingly
happy in spite of severe winter cold aggravated by the altitude of the place.
In the monastery , monks of all age groups were in a state of bliss,
uncommon to the urban way of living. I wondered as to what was the
unique feature of Tawang and surrounding villages which kept people at
peace with themselves. The Abbot replied, "In the present world, we have a
problem of distrust that has robbed people of their natural happiness and
hence, they develop tendencies to behave violently . The moment you
'remove I and Me' from your mind, you will eliminate hatred towards
fellow human beings. A mind bereft of hatred is immune to violent
thoughts. If violence in our mind is taken away , peace descends, and it not
only permeates into each cell of the body , giving us good health but also
invigorates the ambience. Then, peace and peace alone will blossom in the
Like everything else in Nature man must learn to live in harmony within
and without. The rise and fall in dif ferent times provides ample testimony
of the futility of violent ways, both in thought and action. Mankind has been
a witness to good leaders and bad leaders. Perhaps it takes both to evolve.
In my opinion, all leaders can derive guidance from the speech of Abu Bakr ,
the First Caliph (632-634) -
I have been given the authority over you, and I am not
the best of you. If I do well, help me; and if I do
wrong, set me right. Sincer e regard for truth is loyalty
and disr egard for truth is tr eachery . The weak amongst
you shall be str ong with me till I have secur ed his
rights, if God will; and the str ong amongst you shall
be weak with me till I have wr ested fr om him the
rights of others, if God will. Obey me so long as I
obey God and His Messenger . But if I disobey God
and His Messenger , you owe me no obedience.41
By saying "If I disobey God and His Messenger , you owe me no
obedience", Abu Bakr became the treble of heaven' s harmony .

The key characteristics required for a societal transformer and
entrepreneurs are desire, drive, discipline and determination.42
"As the physical eyesight declines, the spiritual eyesight improves," said
celebrated Greek philosopher , Plato (427-347 BC), in his later years.
Einstein described a person, who only reads newspapers and books by
contemporary authors, as an extremely myopic and yet scorns eyeglasses.
What he meant was that one can' t be completely dependent on the
prejudices and fashions of his/her times. How will such a person ever get to
see or hear anything else? According to American novelist, Edith Wharton
(1862- 1937), in spite of illness or sorrow ,one can remain alive long past the
usual date of disintegration provided one remains unaf fected by change.43
Why should it be surprising that people who have carved out unique lives
for themselves surrender to a monotonous end? Why should not they
approach the end-phase of life creatively? You only hurt yourself when
you're not expanding and growing. That' s what evolution and the expansion
of love are really about. None exemplifies it better than the lives of Marie
Curie and Mother Teresa.
Marie Curie (1867-1934), Polish-French physicist and chemist, was a
pioneer in the early field of radioactivity .Later , she went on to become the
first two-time Nobel laureate and the only person with Nobel Prizes in two
different fields of science. She got the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics for
discovering the radiation phenomena with Antoine Henri Becquerel (1852-
1908) and husband, Pierre Curie (1859-1906). She got the 191 1 Nobel Prize
in Chemistry for her discovery of radium and polonium and her study of
radium. Her daughter , Irene Joliot-Curie, continued working on the
synthesis of new radioactive elements and won a Nobel Prize for Chemistry
During the First World War, a global military conflict took place mostly in
Europe between 1914 and 1918. Marie Curie designed the first mobile X-ray
machine and travelled with it along the front lines examining soldiers for
surgery. She was known to have an amazing memory and a diligent work
ethic. She neglected even food and sleep while at work. She was known to
have carried test tubes full of radioactive isotopes in her pocket. She stored
them in her desk drawer , resulting in exposure to radiation. Marie Curie' s
death came from aplastic anaemia due to her massive exposure to radiation.
A similar zeal and determination emanated out of Mother Teresa (1910-
1997). While Marie Curie died cradling nascent scientific ideas, Mother
Teresa took the dying and cradled them. She persuaded Calcutta that
leprosy was not contagious and got the leprosy-af flicted to build a self-
supporting colony at Titagarh. Her biographer , Navin Chawla, writes that
one of her happiest memories was of the man who said as he lay dying in
her lap, "All my life I have lived like an animal on the streets and now I am
dying like an angel." Her prized children, often without limbs or with
terminal diseases, were whom she would rescue from dustbins.
From a single school which she started in a Calcutta slum in 1948; the
Missionaries of Charity founded by her spread throughout the world. It
rendered selfless service to the destitute and the needy . The Order provided
in a year , food to half a million hungry children in five continents, treated a
quarter of million sick, taught over 20,000 slum children and ran homes for
the mentally destitute, the leprosy-af flicted, aids patients, the crippled and
alcoholics and drug abusers. Her concern for the mar ginalised is
unparalleled. She was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1979.
Who will continue this great legacy? I feel science is already doing that.
Empowered with science, thousands of human have raised themselves to
angelic heights. Rightly applied, science is no less ef fective and palliative
than the works of Madam Curie and Mother Teresa. Science is, indeed, a
boon bestowed upon humanity . It has already af fected fundamental changes
in the ground rules of the world in favour of the underprivileged.
When I opted for Physics instead of Engineering in 1963, there was a pride
associated with studying Physics. There is reduced status of the scientists in
the society today primarily , because the students who cannot get through
engineering schools alone are studying science. The trend has af fected the
quality of science in India. I find Sir C.V . Raman' s (1888-1970) clarion call
of indomitable spirit of greater relevance today .
I would like to tell the young men and women befor e me not to lose hope
and courage. Success can only come to you by courageous devotion to the
task lying in fr ont of you. I can assert without fear of contradiction that the
quality of the Indian mind is equal to the quality of any T eutonic, Nor dic or
Anglo-Saxon mind. What we lack is per haps courage, what we lack is
perhaps driving for ce which takes one anywher e. We have, I think,
developed an inferiority complex. I think what is needed in India today is
the destruction of that defeatist spirit. W e need a spirit of victory , a spirit
that will carry us to our rightful place under the sun, a spirit, which will
recognise that we, as inheritors of a pr oud civilisation, ar e entitled to a
rightful place on this planet. If that indomitable spirit wer e to arise, nothing
can hold us fr om achieving our rightful destiny .44
Good teaching, indeed, emanates from research. The teachers' love for
research and their experience in research are vital for the growth of
institutions. Any University is judged by the level and extent of the research
work it accomplishes. This sets in a regenerative cycle of excellence.
Experience of research leads to quality teaching and quality teaching
imparted to the young, in turn, enriches the research.
I am 75 now . When I reflect upon the work my peers and younger
colleagues are doing, I can see four basic patterns - how they have dealt
with changes in physical and cognitive capacities, in habits and personal
traits, in relationships with the field, or in relationships with domains. It is
only expected that a person' s abilities to perform physically and mentally
declines with age. Are there any positive changes?
Psychologists, particularly in the area of psychometrics45, have long made a
distinction between two broad types of mental activities. The first is what
they call fluid intelligence, or the ability to respond rapidly , to have quick
reaction times, to compute fast and accurately . This ability is measured by
tests asking a person to remember a series of numbers or letters, recognise
patterns embedded in more complex figures, or draw inferences from
logical or visual relationships. This type of intelligence is supposedly innate
and not af fected by learning. Its various components peak early and there is
a decrease over the years. Past seventy , the decline is usually significant.
The second type of mental ability is known as crystallised intelligence. It is
more dependent on learning than on innate skills. It involves making
sensible judgements, recognising similarities across dif ferent categories,
using induction and logical reasoning. These abilities depend more on
reflection than on quick reaction, and they usually increase with time, at
least, till the age of sixty . I feel it is this kind of mental ability that improves
or, at least, remains stable even in the ninth decade of life. I worked with
Prime Minister , P.V. Narasimha Rao (1921-2004), and Prime Minister , Atal
Bihari Vajpayee (b. 1924), and found them having this ability in abundance.
It was in 1993. I was appointed as the Vice-Chancellor of Madras
University and I went to the of fice of Prime Minister Narasimha Rao on a
farewell call with my predecessor and the then Scientific Advisor to the
Prime Minister , V.S. Arunachalam. The sagacious Prime Minister kept
looking at both of us and then asked me the reason of quitting my Defence
R&D work. Covering the underlying dynamics, I cited my age of 62 years
as a reason. Prime Minister Rao almost chided me saying that he was 80. He
wrote on the file that I would continue as Chief of Defence R&D
Organisation till further orders. No more words were spoken. I continued in
Narasimha Rao, a multilingual, could speak 17 languages, including Urdu,
Marathi, Hindi, Telugu and English with fluency akin to a native speaker .
He also learnt several European languages including French and Spanish.
Narasimha Rao became Prime Minister in 1991. There was acute economic
stagnation. Prime Minister Rao believed India would benefit from
under going an economic transformation. He invited renowned economist,
Manmohan Singh, to become the Finance Minister to lead the reforms.
Prime Minister Rao provided the much needed political will and support to
push economic reforms. India' s economy grew by an average of about 6 per
cent between 1991 and 2000. In a gesture quite unfamiliar in the partisan
ways of Indian politics, Prime Minister Rao picked opposition leader , Atal
Bihari Vajpayee, to represent India at the World Disarmament Conference.
Prime Minister , Atal Bihari Vajpayee, continued the transformation and
expansion of the national economy of the erstwhile government. I saw his
decision-making ability during the Nuclear Tests in April 1998 and the
Kargil War between May and July 1999. He has retained a position of
esteem and respect amongst common people, seldom of fered to politicians
in India. I enjoyed working with Atalji in various capacities including
People in their advanced years can accomplish certain things faster and
better than before because of greater experience and better understanding.
Older people have diminished anxiety over performance but are less driven.
On a personal level, I am probably more trustful in unconscious instincts
than I was before and I'm not as rigid now . Perhaps, a reflection of this can
be seen in the texture of the poems I write.
What we see in our mind' s eye
Soon makes us cry .
So in the end only the journey .
Life itself teaches us so many things. As they grow , people learn from past
mistakes and wrong decisions. This kind of learning can, indeed, be quite
painful. Their absolute enthusiasm is tempered with by the realisation that
they can be wrong. Here lies the biggest challenge for post-retirement
people. The worst mistake people can make in their later years is that they
become contemptuous of what is new . I am one of those who are open to
change. Is there anything permanent in human af fairs? We can lose physical
energy and cognitive skills; we can lose the power and prestige of social
I see age in a positive light because I keep myself deeply involved in tasks
that are exciting. In Rashtrapati Bhavan, I invested quite a bit of my time in
creating a biodiversity park including a scientifically arranged herbal
garden. Like the climber who reaches the top of the mountain and, after
looking around in wonder at the magnificent view , rejoices at the sight of an
even taller neighbouring peak, I am always prepared to pursue another
exciting goal - the journey continues.
My profession and the challenge to my creativity almost always came from
outside. For decades together , interesting and important issues kept arising
and presented me with interesting opportunities for involvement. I always
tried to make the most important task the one that I was working on. Arun
Tiwari (b. 1955) pursued me for seven years to complete Wings of Fir e as
something more pressing would repeatedly cancel our writing-sessions.
Later , when I took over as Principal Scientific Advisor to the Government
of India, I tried to keep motivated by assigning a high priority to whatever it
was that I was working on. India V ision 2020 took shape during those years.
Of course, I had Y.S. Rajan (b. 1943) working with me as the Scientific
On the day I turned 70, I met Prime Minister , Atal Bihari Vajpayee, and
sought his permission to retire from government service and go to Anna
University to spend the rest of my life in an academic ambience. I had had a
few achievements in the past, but those were over and done with and I was
glad that I did well. How long could someone live by the past laurels? I
hardly reminisced and dwelt on my past successes. I was visiting schools
and meeting school children those days on my self-ordained mission of
igniting young Indian minds and I wanted to focus my ener gies on this task.
Out of direct and operating employment, I shifted my focus on those factors
that I thought would have greater leverage on the performance of young
students, not only in the immediate academic years but also in their careers
and overall lives. I started seeing learning as a life-long process. There must
be something more for me to learn.
According to Danish-German psychologist, Erik Erikson (1902-1994), in a
life-time, a person goes through eight psychological stages.46 Each stage
has a psychosocial crisis. In the first stage of infancy that lasts for about
1year after birth, the psychosocial crisis is Trust vs. Mistrust. The child will
let his/her mother out of sight without anxiety and rage, because she has
become an inner certainty as well as an outer predictability . The balance of
trust with mistrust depends lar gely on the quality of maternal relationship.
In younger years (1-3 years), the psychosocial crisis is Autonomy vs.
Shame and doubt. Children in this age question, "Do I need help from
others or not?" How the parents react to the child' s newfound
independence, indeed, draws the first contours of the child' s personality .If
the reactions are negative, the child may begin to feel shy forfeiting his/her
natural and spontaneous behaviour .
Doubt develops out of experiencing dif ferent behaviours from the same
persons. The child gets baf fled by seeing the front and back of the
behaviour of adults around them. If the doubt is not resolved by the caring
and attentive parent, it develops into outright fear psychosis called paranoia.
These fears sometimes remain operational throughout life.
In early childhood (3-5 years), Initiative vs. Guilt crisis develops.
Empowered with the ability to move and decide to perform certain things,
the child develops guilt over the exuberant enjoyment of new locomotive
and mental powers. The question of how moral am I arrives.
During 5-1 1 years, the question whether I am good at what I do arises .
How a child does at school becomes important in development? It is usually
Industry vs. Inferiority conflict. It is during these years that the child can
The adolescent is now concerned with how they appear to others. Ego
identity is the accrued confidence that the inner sameness and continuity
prepared in the past are matched by the sameness and continuity of one' s
meaning for others. These are the years (1 1-18 years) of Identity vs. Role
In early adulthood (18-34 years), the new-found capacity for mutuality
transcends childhood dependency .The grown-up child moves away from
close relationships and shares with others. The danger at this stage is
isolation which can lead to severe character problems. This phase of life is
marked by a conflict of body and mind. Sixteenth century British poet, John
Your mind is slave to Fate, Chance, and king
And in your body poisons, weary ,
Middle Adulthood (35-60 years) is marked by Generativity vs. Stagnation
psychosocial crisis. Generativity is the concern in establishing and guiding
the next generation. Simply having or wanting children doesn' t achieve
generativity . To generate means to do socially-valued work. The central task
is creativity in this phase of life.
In later adulthood (60 years-Death), psychosocial crisis of ego integrity vs.
despair dominates the psyche. Ego integrity is the ego' s accumulated
assurance of its capacity for order and meaning. Despair is signified by a
fear of one' s own death, as well as the loss of self-suf ficiency , and of loved
partners and friends. Healthy children, Erikson tells us, won' t fear life if
their elders have integrity enough not to fear death. The central task now is
introspection. Handled well, it leads to a sense of fulfilment about life; a
sense of unity with self and others. Wisdom settles in day-to-day activities.
There is detached yet active concern with life in the face of death. The
developmental task is to promote intellectual vigour; redirect ener gy to new
roles and activities; and develop a point of view about death.
British poet, Robert Grave (1927-1940), wrote:
Befor e our death, instead of when death comes, Facing
the wide glar e of the childr en's day , Facing the r ose,
the dark sky and the drums, W e shall go mad, no
doubt, and die that way .48
What I understand from this is that if we live long enough and we resolve
all the earlier tasks of adulthood - such as developing a viable identity , a
close and satisfying intimacy , and if we succeed in passing on our genes by
giving birth to a child and our values by rearing the child, then even a last
remaining task is essential for our full development as a human being. This
consists in bringing together a meaningful story of our past and present, and
in reconciling ourselves with the approaching end of life.
Two important aspects emer ge here. The first is about the individual life. A
life is indeed a gift. No doubt, wavering, hesitation or fright must stop an
individual from growing, performing and achieving all that is
possible. British philosopher , Bertrand Russell (1872-1970), wrote,
"To teach how to live without certainty , and yet without being paralysed by
hesitation, is per haps the chief thing..."
The second aspect is about social life. Every life is interconnected in a web
of human relations and transactions. The web is much lar ger than it appears
to the eye - family , friends, colleagues, community and so on. Any problem
anywhere leads to mitosis. Harmony in the society is essential and it must
be the axis of the education system. Geor ge Bernard Shaw (1856-1950)
The stability of a civilisation depends finally on the wisdom with which it
distributes its wealth and allots its bur dens of labour , and on the veracity of
the instruction it provides for its childr en. W e cram our childr en with lies,
and punish anyone who tries to enlighten them.49
Albert Einstein took the ar gument of social inequality further . He wrote:
This crippling of individuals I consider the worst evil of capitalism. Our
whole educational system suffers from this evil. An exaggerated competitive
attitude is inculcated into the student, who is trained to worship acquisitive
success as a pr eparation for his futur e car eer.
The education of the individual, in addition to pr omoting his own innate
abilities, would attempt to develop in him a sense of r esponsibility for his
fellow men in place of the glorification of power and success in our present
To me, education has two central functions relating to the individual and the
society . The first is to educate the individual as a free individual - to
understand and use critical thinking skills for determining the truth for
themselves. The second is to educate the individual as a part of the society .
We have a responsibility to contribute back to the society and environment.
Everyone must first give and then receive. This is ultimately why I began to
study Physics and Philosophy , and why I have now read most of the great
philosophers. I believe that Nature is being destroyed on this planet, and the
truth is that this is very thoughtless and dangerous to humanity .
In April 2007, I visited Sree Siddaganga Math, Tumkur , Karnataka during
the 100th birthday of His Holiness Sree Sree Shivakumara Swamiji. A
message of 'Giving' came to my mind celebrating Swamiji' s contribution:
It is in giving that we r eceive
For it is in giving that we shar e
And in sharing that we ar e happy
And our happiness stems fr om our car e.
If you have knowledge, shar e.
If you have r esour ces, distribute.
In the void of those who did not r eceive,
Have we not evolved from Nature and do we not depend on Nature for
survival? This is not just the obvious concern of global warming and
climate change, but the very food we eat, the air we breathe in, the water we
need, all these things are produced by Nature. Humanity has evolved from
the environment. Cycles of seasons, epidemics, diseases and so forth shaped
the fittest of the species. The main cause of concern is the obvious fact that
there are limits to our evolution as to how far we can change our
environment before it begins to destroy us. The plethora of diseases already
arrived out of neglect of environment and unnatural ways of living.
Unprecedented climatic changes are already adversely af fecting. I wonder
when man started drifting away from Nature. When was the genesis of this
In September 2006, I visited Santhigiri Ayurveda Medical College in
Kerala. A fourth year student, Gopalakrishnan, asked me if I saw
deterioration in the age-old values and traditions of the society because of
the common tendency of the masses to 'ape the West'. I answered: "The
West, indeed, symbolises industrialisation. India must develop its industries.
Agriculture alone cannot generate the wealth to give more than one billion
people a certain quality of life. What we must not ape from the West is the
'I before you' way of thinking. Who will ensure this?"
The educational institutions must have a one-hour class every week to
promote moral values and integrated living through reputed teachers. While
I was studying in St. Joseph' s College, Trichchirapalli, I remember the
lectures given by the highest authority of the Jesuit institution, Rev . Father
Rector Kalathil. Every week on Monday , he used to take class for an hour
talking about good human beings, present and past, and what makes a
decent human being. In this class, he used to give lectures on personalities
such as the Buddha, Confucius, St. Augustine, Caliph Omar , Mahatma
Gandhi, Einstein, Abraham Lincoln including some scientific personalities
and moral stories linked to our civilisation heritage. It is essential in the
secondary schools and colleges to arrange a lecture by a great teacher of the
institution once a week for one hour on India' s civilisation heritage and
value systems derived from it.
If people in their later years look back with bewilderment and regret, they
will be unable to accept the choices we have made. They will wish for
another chance. Absence of proper education in their earlier life is the main
reason. A meaningful old age comes out of a meaningful life. Old age,
indeed, serves the need for that integrated heritage which gives
indispensable perspective on the life cycle. I have seen in my father , who
lived for 103 years, a detached yet active concern for life. He remains the
wisest person of all the powerful and learned people I have ever met.

Flowering of the Mind
In history , any country revolves itself initially around a few stout and
I was browsing the website of Geof f Haselhurst (b. 1959) which was
created as a science forum of dynamic unity of reality .52 Haselhurst sees
two main problems of human nature. According to him, humankind is
trapped in its collective mind; second, it is trapped in money . I can
understand business people operating on the forces of the market.
Interestingly , in the knowledge profession, there is an affinity towards
conformity and prosperity . This makes it dif ficult for academicians and
scientists to probe and explore new knowledge. Human beings only sense a
fraction of the real world, which is then represented by the mind. For
example, in reality , the sky is not blue but a mere reflection. We see it blue
because we see a certain frequency of light waves. Likewise, we 'see' things
as separate and discrete objects although reason and physics tell us that all
things in the universe are subtly interconnected. For example, the moon
orbits the earth and the earth orbits the sun.
Classical Greek philosophers held that truth or falsity of a representation is
determined solely by how it relates to objective reality . It was postulated
that truth requires a proper fit of elements within a whole system. This led
to the realisation that truth is constructed by social processes, which are
historically and culturally specific: shaped through the power struggles
within a community .
However , it is ar gued that reference to the future is essential to a proper
conception of the truth.53
Throughout the ages, sages advocated that we can' t see what is true even
when it is presented to us because what is true is not what we expect or
want to hear . It is not that truth is not geared for us; we are not geared for
that truth. In contemporary language, it is called choosing; choosing what is
familiar or like most of us over what is dif ferent even if it is true or sacred.
The intellectual arrogance of two great civilisations of India and China did
not allow them to embrace the truth of industrialisation and technology for
many decades. Of course, a deficit of political grit was also an issue.
However , in the last two decades, both nations shed their fears of accepting
the Western ways of generating wealth and recharted their course of
development. The strength of India as a knowledge society and China as an
industrial society has finally manifested.
In India, we have 5 million college level students, out of a total population
of over 1 billion. By the American proportion, we would have 12 million or
more in college. Our graduates have made an impressive mark
abroad. Indians are the most visible foreign-nationality in many great
institutions like NASA and companies like Microsoft. There is an enormous
undeveloped hinterland with excess rural population without avenues for
higher education. They land up in cities but never blossom as an
individual. Peter Drucker (1909-2005) observed that India has done an
amazing job of absorbing excess rural population into the cities. In fact,
India' s rural population has changed from 90 per cent to 54 per cent.54
The quality of our educational institutions, except for a prestigious few , is
indeed a matter of concern. Also, talent is not attracted towards science as
earlier . The last Nobel Prize in science came in 1983. There is a rush for
acquiring information technology skills and getting jobs in the financially
lucrative service sector . Is our youth really catching up with the world and
is it prepared for the globalised economy of the twenty-first century? Is our
education system on course?
The Indian education system is criticised for not meeting the aspirations of
the society and for being unable to prepare people for the fundamental
Only children in rich and privileged families have access to good schools
where commercial forces rule the roost. The education available to an
average Indian child is grossly inappropriate for the requirements of a
developed country in the making.
Padma Sarangapani55 describes Indian youth as the ajnatanvestas or
seekers of the unknown, as they stand now on the shores of the vast
brahmandam of the third millennium. They boldly , yet humbly , seek to
make sense of all the great happenings around them. To answer the
dilemma that the Indian youth find themselves in, we seem to need
educational insights that marry the most profound learning possible with
every passing day; the subtle with the mundane; or to express it another
way, the academic with the industrial and the theoretical with the practical.
India has produced great philosophers and teachers. I have read the works of
Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941), Swami Vivekananda (1863-1902), Sri
Aurobindo Ghosh (1872-1950) and Jiddu Krishnamurti (1895-1986). I
discussed extensively the works of Sir Syed Ahmed Khan (1817-1898) and
Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya (1861-1946) who founded two great
Universities at Aligarh and Benaras respectively . In the context of this book,
the thoughts of Rabindranath Tagore and Jiddu Krishnamurti provide two
polarities: Rabindranath Tagore viewed culture as the medium in which the
individual potential finds expression; Krishnamurti saw culture as a barrier
that must be overcome for innovation to happen. Between these two
extreme positions, we find a spectrum of thoughts.
Krishnamurti started with the Theosophical Society as a young boy . His
wake-up call came in 1925, after his brother 's death.
An old dr eam is dead and a new one is being born, as a flower that pushes
through the solid earth. A new vision is coming into being and a gr eater
consciousness is being unfolded. ... A new str ength, born of suffering, is
pulsating in the veins and a new sympathy and understanding is being born
of past suffering - a greater desir e to see others suffer less, and, if they
must suffer , to see that they bear
it nobly and come out of it without too many scars. I have wept, but I do not
want others to weep.56
Although Krishnamurti' s extensive work is subtle yet it is complex. He did
not explicitly define positions; instead, his understanding is interwoven
throughout his work. Krishnamurti saw human beings as having dif ferent
facets (like intellects, emotions, appetites, bodies etc.).
He said that none of the facets independently can define an individual. The
facets are aspects of the whole. Humans have minds as well as brains, but
they both deal with ideas about reality but not reality by itself. For example,
we criticize corruption which is an idea. But we seldom hesitate in bribing
our way through which is the reality of corruption.
The brain is the material centre of the nervous system and the or gan of
cognition. It is, therefore, responsible for the co-ordination of the senses,
memory , rationality , intellectual knowledge, etc. The mind, which is not
material, is related to insight, non-visual perception, compassion, and the
profound intelligence that is the real goal of life. It is also the real goal of
education. Obviously , one needs a brain that functions well, like one needs
a heart or a liver that functions well. But the real source of acting rightly , of
goodness, and of a virtuous life is the mind. In this unequal relationship
between the brain and the mind, a good brain cannot ameliorate a mind
except perhaps freeing itself from its conditioning and from activities that
inhibit the mind' s healthy functioning, such as hate, fear , pride, etc. Helping
the brain do this is one of the main functions of education; not accumulating
knowledge. It is to the full flowering of the mind that Krishnamurti felt
education should direct itself.57
The human brain normally works by fragmenting the whole. One very
important task that the brain needs to learn is to stop this fragmenting
process when it is not necessary . Consequently , as possessors of both brains
and minds, humans have the capacity of participating in the universe at
different levels, from the specific to the general. For example, the reality of
a flower is that it is a rose or a jasmine. Or , like a hard existentialist, one
might consider most real that which is most particular . Here the specific
fragrance of the rose defines the reality of the rose. Krishnamurti described
human beings as not only having the capacity to venture to both limits but
also to unite them.
Krishnamurti described education as a three-fold process.58 (1) Education
starts with addressing the elementary behaviour of the person; (2) the
person is educated as an individual; and (3) the person is educated to be part
of society , humanity , Nature etc. Education is, therefore, not limited to
preparation for only a part of life, like work or career , but is about
grounding oneself to understand the nuances of the life for a purposeful
What could be the objectives of education? Surely , the schools and colleges
must be centres of learning, a way of life which is not based either on
pleasure or on self-centred activities, but on the understanding of correct
action, the depth and beauty of relationship and the sacredness of a pious
Meaningful growth and real material change without unfortunate side-
effects cannot be produced by just ensuring that young people acquire
knowledge and skills, and teaching them to conform to the strictures and
demands of society in order to get on in life. Merely to stuf f the child with a
lot of information, making him pass examinations, is the most unintelligent
form of education. Educating a child to what he or she is not, is a crime.
Another concept that Krishnamurti stressed on, is freedom. But what is this
freedom? Krishnamurti often stated that the purpose of education is to bring
about freedom, love, the flowering of goodness and the complete
transformation of society .59 This freedom is, indeed, internal rather than the
political type. Education must be concerned with deeper freedom of the
psyche and the spirit. The inner liberation is both the means and the ends of
education. There can be no freedom at the end of compulsion.
If you dominate a child and fit him/her into a template of one' s fancy , are
not its natural instincts being curbed? If we want education to bring about a
true manifestation of a child' s potential, there must obviously be freedom at
the very beginning. It implies that both the parent and the teacher must be
concerned with the natural development and not with how to help the child
to become this or that. I was, indeed, sorry to learn that many children from
affluent families are outsourcing their homework and assignments to poorer
A transformed society will emer ge only when education under goes the
process of transformation and liberation from cultural and social templates.
Education is intended to assist people to become truly what they are. These
intentions must not be just pleasant sounding ideals but practising norms in
When the process of education is ingrained for inner liberation, both the
students and the teachers interact on a level platform, not distorted by
functional authority .In helping the student towards freedom, the educator is
also changing his/her own values; and beginning to get rid of the 'me' and
the 'mine'. This process of mutual education creates an altogether dif ferent
relationship between the teacher and the student.60
The overriding quality of an educator , therefore, should be righteousness.
Devoted solely to the freedom and integration of the individual, the right
kind of educator must be deeply and truly righteous and bereft of any
sectarian beliefs or rituals.
When we ask, "Who are you?" it is answered as, "I'm a doctor , an engineer ,
a businessman etc." though the question is asked about the 'being' the
answer is a statement about 'doing'. Why this reversal or confusion? The
importance of the students' 'being' - their deepest sensitivities, their
goodness and intelligence, the depth of their questions about themselves
and the world - must be central to any teaching methodology regardless of
the career for which the teaching is done. Academic prowess, cultural
abilities or capacities are not more important than the willingness and
ability to lead a righteous life. In the final analysis, a student needs to be
made known to his or her true self and not shaped by the teacher into this or
Mind is infinite. It is everlastingly free. The real issue is the quality of our
mind. Mind is the nature of the Universe which has its own order and its
own immense ener gy. Indian tradition refers to the mind as Chidakash
(consciousness space). The brain is the slave of knowledge and so is
limited, finite and fragmentary . The brain can only become infinite if it
frees itself from its conditioning.
Then only there is no division between the mind and the brain. According to
Krishnamurti, "Education is freedom from conditioning, from its vast
accumulated knowledge as tradition." In the poignant words of American
author , Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803-1882):
Go, speed the stars of Thought, On to their shining
goals; - The sower scatters br oad his seed, The
wheat thou str ew'st be souls.61
This, however , does not undermine the academic disciplines which have
their own important place in life. The point relates to precedence. Intellect is
acquired through senses. The educational theories of Swiss philosopher ,
Rousseau (1712-1778); Swiss educationist, Pestalozzi (1746-1827);
German educator , Frobel (1782-1852); and Italian doctor -teacher ,
Montessori (1870-1952) - all promote the idea that sense must be educated
befor e the intellect . The traditional emphasis on the disciplining of the
senses is weaning in our schools.
Freedom lies in understanding what you are from moment to moment. To
understand life is to understand ourselves. Not only is a person' s nature and
deepest aspects to be uncovered, but each person also has a unique vocation
that needs to be discovered. What he or she really loves to do have to be
found and nurtured. Stereotyping children is a form of deprivation of the
worst kind, especially if such deprivation is driven by vested interests of the
governments, religion or social or ganisations.
In the recent times, the concept of capacity building has replaced the
classical education model. Capacity building is an all-encompassing term
for activities which strengthen the knowledge, abilities, skills and behaviour
of individuals. Capacity building goes beyond an individual. It involves
working on institutional structures and processes in the society .
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) defined capacity
building as the creation of an enabling environment with appropriate policy
and legal frameworks; institutional development, including community
participation, particularly of the women; human resources development and
strengthening of managerial systems. It is a long-term, continuing process,
in which not only students but also all other stakeholders such as industry ,
trade, community and government participate.
A good educational model is the need of the hour to ensure that the students
grow to contribute to the economic growth of a nation. Can we sow the
seeds of capacity-building amongst the students? There will be continuous
innovation during the learning process. To realise this, special capacities are
required to be built into our education system for nurturing the students.
The capacities which are required to be built are research and enquiry ,
creativity and innovation, use of high technology , entrepreneurial and moral
The management of knowledge is beyond the capacity of a single
individual. The amount of information that we have around us is
overwhelming. There will always be a need to balance the desire of
inventors to protect their discoveries, and the incentives to which such
protection gives rise, and the needs of the public, which benefits from wider
access to knowledge, with a resulting increase in the pace of discovery and
the lower prices that come from competition.
The management of knowledge, therefore, must move out of the realm of
the individual and shift into the realm of the networked groups. The
students must learn how to manage knowledge collectively . When
information is networked, the power and utility of the information grows as
square as stated by Metcalfe' s law .62 Information that is static does not
grow . According to Nobel Laureate, Joseph Stiglitz (b. 1943), "Indeed,
monopolisation may result in not only static inef ficiency but also reduced
innovation. A patent that covered all four wheeled cars - that would have
granted Selden a monopoly on the automobile - would have left little room
for Henry Ford' s innovation of an af fordable car ."63 In the new digital
economy , information that is circulated creates innovation and contributes
All students in our colleges should learn to know how to use the latest
technology for aiding their learning process. Digital illiteracy is indeed a
sacrilege. Universities should equip themselves with adequate computing
equipment, laboratory equipment and Internet facilities and provide an
environment for the students to enhance their learning ability .
Will the technological revolution diminish the role of a teacher? I think that
the role of the teacher can never be undermined. In fact, the teacher will
become even more important and the whole world of education will become
teacher -assisted. The best of the teachers will be tele-ported to every nook
and corner of the world. Care Foundation and Netaji Subhas Open
University have already demonstrated this in the field of nursing education.
Besides computer -assisted learning, the aptitude for entrepreneurship
should be cultivated from the very beginning in the university environment
itself. We must teach our students to take calculated risks for the sake of
larger gain, but within the ethos of a good business. They should also
cultivate a disposition to do things right. This capacity will enable them to
take up challenging tasks later .
Moral leadership involves two aspects. First, it requires the ability to have
compelling and powerful dreams or visions for human betterment. Moral
leadership requires a disposition to do the right thing and influence others
also to do the same.
If we instil into all our students these five capacities, we will produce
Autonomous Learners, self-directed, self-controlled, lifelong learners who
will have the capacity to both respect and question authority in an
appropriate manner . These are the leaders who would work together as a
self-or ganising network and transform any state as a prosperous state. These
capacities will enable the students to meet the challenges of our national
mission of transforming the nation into a developed country by 2020.
When the students graduate, approximately 10 per cent of them take up
research or some specialisation. The remaining 90 per cent of the graduates
look for jobs. Where are the jobs? The youth must be empowered with the
spirit 'I can do it'. The education system should inspire the young to
achieve this capacity . Graduates with such a prepared mind can definitely
be able to assume the leadership of small enterprises with the assistance of
venture capital provided by banks. This will enable the nation to have a
number of employment generators rather than employment seekers.
Most of the young readers of this book are going to work with the
integrated system of psychology and physiology of human beings.
Raymond Kurzweil (b. 1948), a pioneer in the fields of Optical Character
Recognition (OCR), text-to-speech synthesis, speech recognition
technology and electronic keyboard instruments, called computers as
emer gent spiritual machines .64 The World Wide Web will make a
tremendous impact in the way we communicate and live. Most of the
computers and accessories will be micro-sized, wearable and will have
wireless communications with one another . Moderately priced PCs, capable
of performing about a billion calculations per second today , will be able to
perform about a trillion calculations per second within the next decade. By
2020, the computational ability of an ordinary PC will exceed the capability
of the human brain. By 2030, the capability of a normal PC will be around a
thousand times more. How is man going to retain its supremacy over the
What distinguishes human beings from all the less advanced forms of life
on the earth is that, having, at last, become conscious of the challenge of
survival, we have consciously undertaken to shape our own future. This
requires us to look ahead, even beyond the span of any single generation.
Any living generation enjoys the fruits of the ef forts of its forefathers. This
places on it the responsibility of creating a better future for the coming
generation. Are we doing that?
India purchases liquid petroleum fuel to meet transport needs of
automobiles, trucks, trains and planes. We import about 70 per cent of the
total oil consumed. Oil imports constitute the single lar gest item in the total
annual import bill of the country . Hence, our economy is dangerously
vulnerable to fluctuating global fuel prices. There have been over 20 such
instances in the last 50 years where our economy was almost destabilised
on account of fluctuations in the international oil prices. About 40 per cent
of the export earnings are funnelled back into importing oil for domestic
consumption. A sustained 5 per cent rise in the oil price over a year will
slash our GDP growth rate by 0.25 per cent and raise the inflation rate by
According to the International Ener gy Agency (IEA), the ener gy intensity
of the Indian economy is nearly three times that of the developed countries.
This means that for producing the same quantity of output, the consumption
of ener gy in India is almost three times that of any developed country .
With the domestic demand for oil growing at the rate of about five per cent
a year , India' s dependence on imported oil is likely to become near total
within the next four decades. What kind of secure economy are we handing
over to our future generations?
In a world of growing oil-rivalry between nation States, India has to find its
place in the global ener gy game. With the future of West Asia as a reliable
crude supplier becoming uncertain India must buy oil from the countries in
South Asian region, Central Asia, Russia, Africa and Latin America. It is
not easy , but is imperative.
We also need to shed our inhibitions and invest in of f-shore oilfields and
energy projects in Vietnam, Algeria, Kazakhstan, Indonesia, Libya and
Syria. There are ener gy assets in Nigeria, Chad, Angola, Ghana and
Cameroon, Congo and Gabon. India must bid.
Oil has always been thought of as the traditional cause of conflict.
Countries have squabbled over borders in the hope that ownership of certain
areas or tracts might give them access to new riches. However in the 21st
century world, most international borders have been set, oil fields mapped
and reserves accurately estimated. Humankind is now poised to fight over
the water resources. Water is taking over from oil as the likeliest cause of
Although all natural water resources are replenished through the natural
hydrological cycle yet their renewal rate ranges from days to millennia. The
average renewal rate for rivers is about 18 days, i.e. to renew every drop
taken out. While for lar ge lakes and deep aquifer , they can span thousand
years. Generally , a country with less than 1,700 cubic metre per capita is
regarded as experiencing water stress, while less than 1000 cubic metre is
regarded as water shortage.
India was ranked 100th among the 147 'water -poorest' countries in the world
in a 'water poverty index' at the University of Keel and Institute of
Nothing short of a comprehensive long-term quest integrating all branches
of human knowledge will be enough to grasp the finite reality of the earth
where biotic and abiotic life are inevitably linked. Although science may
superficially seem very dif ferent from philosophy , history , justice and
aesthetics yet they all are components of a single continuous spectrum.
Thus, India' s water crisis demands for its resolution by a syner gy of all
disciplines of human knowledge.
Adapting to the earth' s natural resource systems requires a very dif ferent set
of complementary skills, knowledge and mindset. These systems are lar ge,
complex, interconnected. They cannot be precisely described or controlled.
In managing these, the best available science has to be combined with an
equal measure of thought and judgment based on human considerations.
According to T.N. Narasimhan65, "Even as India is currently preoccupied
with exercising its blessings of democracy , the Earth remains for gotten.
Human values, however , noble, are transient. It is unrealistic to follow
policies and enact laws assuming that Nature will be unaf fected by the
unprecedented promise of economic prosperity . India will do well to step
back deliberately and reflect on whether this vision of prosperity based on
materials and commerce can be sustained when the Earth remains ignored."
In India 2050, I can visualise water from the Brahmaputra and the Ganga
systems flowing westwards to southern Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab and
Rajasthan. Perhaps, it may eventually go southwards to the peninsular
component connecting the Mahanadi, the Godavari, the Krishna, the Pennar
and the Cauvery . Layered wells are constructed at the entry points of River
Kosi flowing from Nepal and River Brahmaputra flowing from Tibet.These
layered wells will store floodwater at dif ferent levels and will control the
intensity of damage in low-lying areas by reducing the velocity of the flow .
There are Nuclear Power Stations in every major State, an Indian Space
Station, and above all, a conflict-free subcontinent.

See the flower ,See the flower , doles out fragrance and honey . It gives to
all,gives freely its essence. When its work is done, it falls away quietly . Try
to be like the flower ,unassuming despite all its qualities.66
In November 2005, I visited Ajmer and prayed to Hazrat Khwaja
Muinuddin Chishti (May the mercy of Allah be upon him!) at the Holy
Shrine of Garib Nawaz (patron of the poor). Khwaja walked into Ajmer67 at
the age of 52 in 1 190, on a divine mission, unique in the annals of Islam. He
left his mortal frame at the age of 97. He brought the message of universal
love and peace. He chose the way of non-compulsion in the true spirit of the
Holy Quran , which says: "Let there be no compulsion in religion. Truth
stands out clear from error; whoever rejects evil and believes in Allah has
grasped the most trustworthy hand-hold that never breaks. And Allah hears
and knows all things."68Garib Nawaz provided a mystic interpretation of
Islamic life within the bonds of religious orthodoxy . He maintained that a
friend of God must have af fection like the sun. When the sun rises, it is
beneficial to all. All persons derive heat and light from it irrespective of
whether they are the Muslims, the Christians or the Hindus. A friend of God
must be generous like an ocean or a river . We all get water from the river to
quench our thirst. No discrimination is made whether we are good or bad or
whether we are related or strangers.
A friend of God is one who has the quality of hospitality like the earth. We
are raised and cradled in its lap, and it is always spread below our feet.
Mysticism is a practical spiritual discipline based on the insight of
illuminated seekers after the truth. It is, in fact, a mission of higher religious
order of any faith, which disdains strife and conflict in any form. Joy of
self-realisation being the essence of religion is experienced after a long
spiritual practice. The mystics discard the outward form of religion once
they attain bliss. The concept of Sufism was, therefore, to focus the mystic
power on the spiritual dimension of Islam with a view to shielding the
believers from the outwardly and unrealistic dogma of faith.69
The Sufis have called the inner -being 'the child of the spiritual concepts',
tifl al-ma'ani in Arabic. It is born from the heart, as the child is born from
the mother .The ordinary child remains unstained by the manipulations of
the world. This inner child is likewise pure and unstained by the
heedlessness and physicality . Here 'child' symbolises purity . This 'child' is
the real human being, as it is created by the Almighty God.
In Islamic parlance, heart is the abode of knowledge. The virtue of the heart
is equanimity which is the quality of being calm and even-tempered. The
fullness of the heart is marked by unbiased and unfettered evaluation of the
reality . A wrong act is seen as wrong even if it is done by one' s own blood
relative. The metaphor of blind king Dhritrashtra in the epic Mahabharata
depicts a blind heart.
The power to endure the reality is a greater virtue. In Islamic parlance,
surrender to the reality of God belongs to the expansion of the breast. When
Moses was sent to the court of Pharaoh, his immediate exclamation
was"Expand for me my breast."70
When you are inspired by some great purpose for an extraordinary project,
all your thoughts break the bonds; your mind transcends limitations; your
consciousness expands and you find yourself in a great and wonderful
In February 2006, I addressed a gathering of more than two million people
congregated at Jakkur Airfield, Bangalore. They came from more than 100
countries. They belonged to diverse religions and cultures. They were
invited to The Art of Living Silver Jubilee Celebrations. The Art of Living
movement founded by Sri Sri Ravi Shankar (b. 1956) has touched more
than 20 million people worldwide. Sri Sri Ravi Shankar 's key message is
secularity of religion. He emphasises breath as the subtle link between body
and mind, and many of his techniques use the breath as a tool to relax the
mind. His Sudarshan Kriya technique involves cycle of breaths - long,
medium and short. It claims to infuse the body with ener gy and harmonise
the natural rhythms of the body , mind and emotions. What causes the
dissonance of body , mind and emotions?
The term used for what one would like to be is persona. The persona of a
person is how he/she or the family or the community wants him or her to be
seen by the world. It is, indeed, psychological clothing which mediates
between our true selves and our environment just as our physical clothing
presents an image to those we meet. What we know consciously about
ourselves is called ego. That part of us which we fail to see or know
consciously is called the shadow by Swiss psychiatrist, Carl Jung (1875-
1961). He described it as a psychic activity which continues independently
of the conscious mind and is untouched, and perhaps untouchable by
personal experience. The purpose of education is to bring light on to this
shadow and integrate it into the conscious.
It is important to know how the shadow originates. We all are born whole.
Let us hope we will die whole. But somewhere early on our way , we eat one
of the wonderful fruits of the tree of knowledge, things separate into good
and evil, and we begin the shadow-making process; we divide our lives. In
the cultural process, we sort out our God-given characteristics into those
that are acceptable to our society and those that have to be put away . This is
wonderful and necessary , and there will be no civilised behaviour without
this sorting out of good and evil. But the rejected and unacceptable
characteristics do not go away; they only collect in the dark corners of our
personality . When they have been hidden long enough, they take on a life of
their own - the shadow life. Rumi has stated this so beautifully:
The angel is saved thr ough knowledge,
The beast - through ignorance.
struggle the people of this world.71
I have mentioned this in my book Guiding Souls. Many readers responded
to this. Therefore, I chose to repeat it and elaborate here. The story goes like
this: The Amir of Rum said to Rumi, "The non-believers used to worship
and bow down to idols. Now we are doing the same thing. We go and bow
down and wait upon the Mongols, and yet we consider ourselves the
Muslims. We have many other idols in our heart too, such as greed, passion,
temper and envy . We are obedient to all of them. So, we act in the very
same way as the non-believers, both outwardly and inwardly , and yet we
consider ourselves the Muslims!"
Rumi answered, "But here is something dif ferent; it enters your thoughts
that this conduct is evil and utterly detestable. The eye of your heart has
seen something incomparably greater that shows up this behaviour as vile
and hideous. Brackish water shows its brackishness to one who has tasted
sweet water , and things are made clear by their opposites."
Then, Rumi recited the above poem. There are three kinds of creatures.
First, there are angels, who are pure spiritual conscience. Worship, service
and the remembrance of God are their nature and their food. They eat and
live upon that essence. Like fish in the water , their mattresses and pillows
are the water . Angels are pure and free of lust. What favour do they gain by
not yielding to such desires? Since they are free of these things, they have
no struggle against them. If they obey God' s will, it is not counted as
obedience, for this is their nature, and they cannot be otherwise. Second,
there are the beasts who are pure sensuality , having no spiritual conscience
to restrain them. They , too, are under no burden of obligation. Finally , there
remains the poor human being, who is a compound of spiritual conscience
and sensuality .We are half angel, half beast, half snake and half fish. The
fish draws us towards water , the snake towards the earth. We are engaged in
a battle for ever . If our spiritual conscience overcomes our sensuality , we
are higher than the angels. If our sensuality overcomes our spiritual
conscience, we are lower than the beasts.72
What is the message? God has implanted in soul the light of faith to see
these things as hideous. Confronted by beauty , this appears ugly . Yet others
are not af fected this way , they are perfectly happy in their existing state,
saying, "This is absolutely fine." God will grant you your heart' s desire -
where your ambition is, that will be yours. As the bird flies with its wings,
the believers fly with their aspirations.
The shadow is that which has not entered adequately into consciousness. It
is the despised quarter of our being. It often has an ener gy potential nearly as
great as that of our ego. If it accumulates more ener gy than our ego, it
erupts as an overpowering rage or some indiscretion that slips past us; or we
have a depression or an accident that seems to have its own purpose. The
shadow that becomes autonomous is a terrible monster in our psychic
The civilising process, which is the brightest achievement of humankind,
consists of picking out those characteristics that are dangerous to the
smooth functioning of our ideals. Anyone who does not go through this
process remains 'primitive' and can have no place in a civilised society . We
all are born whole but somehow the culture demands that we live out only
part of our nature and refuse other parts of our inheritance. We divide the
self into an ego and a shadow because our cultures insist that we behave in
a particular manner . Perhaps, this is the legacy of man from having eaten
the fruit of the tree of knowledge in the Garden of Eden as Christian
Culture has been called the way of life for an entire society . As such, it
includes code of manners, dress, language, religion, rituals, norms of
behaviour and systems of belief. Culture takes away the simple human in
us, but gives us more complex and sophisticated power . One can make a
forceful ar gument that children should not be subject to this division too
soon or they will be robbed of their childhood; they should be allowed to
remain in the Garden of Eden till they are strong enough to stand the
cultural process without being broken by it. This strength comes at dif ferent
ages for dif ferent individuals and it requires a keen eye to know when
children are prepared to adapt to the collective life of a society .75
It is interesting to travel around the world and see which characteristics
various cultures af fix to the ego and which to the shadow . It becomes clear
that cultures are an artificially imposed structure, but an absolutely
necessary one. We find that in one country , we drive on the right side of the
road; in another , on the left side of the road.
In the Western world, a man may walk hand in hand with a woman in the
street but not with another man; in India, he may walk hand in hand with a
male friend but not with a woman. In the West, one shows respect by
wearing shoes in formal or sacred places; in the East, it is a sign of
disrespect to wear shoes when one is in a temple or house. In the Middle
East, one burps at the end of a meal to show pleasure; in the West, this is
considered as bad manners.
The sorting process is quite arbitrary . Individuality , for instance, is a great
virtue in some societies and the greatest sin in others. In the Middle East, it
is a virtue to be selfless. Students of a great master of painting or poetry
will often sign their work with the name of their master rather than their
own. In Western culture, one brings to his or her own name the highest
publicity possible. The clash of these opposing points of view is dangerous
as the rapidly expanding communication network of the modern world
brings us closer together . The shadow of one culture is a tinderbox of
trouble for another .76
It is also astonishing to find that some commendable characteristics turn up
in the shadow . Generally , the ordinary , mundane characteristics are the
norm. Anything less than this goes into the shadow . But anything better also
goes into the shadow! Some of the pure gold of our personality is relegated
to the shadow because it can find no place in the great levelling process, i.e.
Curiously , people resist the noble aspects of their shadow more strenuously
than they hide the dark sides. To draw the skeletons out of the closet is
relatively easy , but to own the gold in the shadow is terrifying. It is more
disrupting to find that you have a profound nobility of character than to find
out you are a wastrel. Of course, you are both; but one does not discover
these two elements at the same time. The gold is related to our higher
calling, and this can be hard to accept at certain stages of life. Ignoring the
gold can be as damaging as ignoring the dark side of the psyche, and some
people may suf fer a severe shock or illness before they learn how to let the
Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941), Asia' s first Nobel Laureate, was of the
belief that it is culture - the social environment, web of beautiful relations
that brings this gold out. The shadow is lightened up and brought out in
aesthetic art forms. The tremendous excitement and cultural richness of his
family permitted young Rabindranath to absorb and learn subconsciously at
his own pace, giving him a dynamic open model of education, which he,
later, tried to recreate in his school at Shantiniketan. Rabindranath Tagore
saw education as a vehicle for appreciating the richest aspects of other
cultures, while maintaining one' s own cultural specificity .
Education has its only meaning and objects in fr eedom from ignorance
about the laws of the universe, and freedom fr om passion and pr ejudice in
our communication with the human world. 78
Rabindranath Tagore visualised an education that was deeply rooted in
one's immediate surroundings but connected to the cultures of the wider
world, predicated upon pleasurable learning and individualised to the
personality of the child.
I invited thinkers and scholars fr om for eign lands to let our childr en know
how easy it is to r ealise our common fellowship, when we deal with those
who ar e great. It is the puny with their petty vanities that set up barriers
between man and man.78
Rabindranath Tagore felt that a curriculum should revolve or ganically
around Nature with classes held in the open air under the trees to provide
for a spontaneous appreciation of the fluidity of Nature. In an essay
entitled 'A Poet' s School,' he emphasises the importance of an empathetic
sense of interconnectedness with the surrounding world:
We have come to this world to accept it, not mer ely to know it. W e may
become powerful by knowledge, but we attain fullness by sympathy . The
highest education is that which does not mer ely give us information but
makes our life in harmony with all existence.79
Tagore' s educational ef forts were path-breaking. He was one of the first in
India to ar gue for a humane educational system that was in touch with the
environment and aimed at overall development of the
personality .Shantiniketan became a model for vernacular instruction and the
development of Bengali textbooks. It also of fered one of the earliest co-
educational programmes in South Asia.
One characteristic that sets Rabindranath' s educational theory apart is his
approach to education as a poet. It was this poetic vision that enabled him to
fashion a scheme of education which was all inclusive, and to devise a
unique programme for education in Nature and creative self-expression in a
learning climate congenial to global cultural exchange.
In a poem that perhaps captures the essence of Rabindranath Tagore' s goals
for education, he writes:
Wher e the mind is without fear and the head is held high,
Wher e knowledge is fr ee;
Wher e the world has not been br oken up into
fragments by narr ow domestic walls;
Wher e wor ds come out fr om the depth of truth;
Wher e tireless striving str etches its arms towar ds perfection;
Wher e the clear str eam of r eason has not lost its
way into the dreary desert sand of dead habit;
Wher e the mind is led forwar d by thee into ever -
widening thought and action-into that heaven of
freedom, my Father ,
Let my country awake.80
Rabindranath Tagore' s contemporary litterateur and educationist, Roquiah
Sakhawat Hossain (1880-1932), played a pioneering role in awakening
Muslim women in Bengal. How can this phenomenon be described?
The contemporary term used is inclusive education. Basically , the idea is to
address the learning needs of all children, youth and adults with a specific
focus on those who are vulnerable to mar ginalisation and exclusion. It
implies that all learners conver ge to a community education setting with an
appropriate network of learning centric support service.
This is possible only in a flexible education system that assimilates the
needs of a diverse range of learners and adapts itself to meet these needs.
However , for it to happen, all stakeholders in the system, learners, parents,
community , teachers, administrators and policy-makers, must be
comfortable with diversity and see it as a challenge rather than a problem.
The garden must have all kinds of flowers.

Specks in Brownian Motion
The management of knowledge must move out of the realm of the
individual and shift into the realm of the networked groups.81
Faith-based giving has been deep-rooted in Indian culture. The concept of
giving for charity was well established with individuals of fering alms for
ascetics. The main motivation behind the charitable acts has been the
religious belief that a charitable activity leads to salvation. Ancient Hindu
texts prescribed Daana (charity) as one of the ways to acquire merit and a
place in heaven. In the Islamic tradition sadaqah (voluntary charity), zakat
(obligatory charity) in addition to good treatment to orphans, parents and
the elderly have been the forms of charity advocated. Since human beings
receive God' s mercy , serving
God regularly by means of good work and gift making is essential. In
gurudwaras (Sikh temples), all those who visit are served free food (
langar ). Christian faith also discusses the notions of charity , which denotes
the love between God and human beings. Love for human beings is
considered as love for God. Surrender and contribution of a prescribed
percentage of income as a measure of gratitude to God, were the common
practices in Christian faith.
Voluntary action in India has sprung from a socio-religious background.
The first half of the 19th century in Indian history showed the emer gence
and rise of social reform movements with the advent of British rule.
Western ideas and the concepts of Christianity were introduced towards the
end of the 18th century . The Charter of 1813 removed all restrictions on
Christian missionaries in India and paved the way for the establishment and
support of churches and Christian or ganisations in India.
In September 2004, I participated in the Sesqui-Centenary celebrations of
St. Geor ge's College, Mussoorie. Standing majestically on a hill, a cut above
the rest, this school was founded by Irish missionaries, Father Barry and
Capuchin Friars in 1853. Society of the Brothers of St. Patrick has nurtured
this school in the most praiseworthy manner . I asked Brother Dominic
Jacob, "What propels selfless action?" I captured from the interaction that a
stage comes in life when individuals take on responsibilities beyond their
regular careers. Many successful people have created charitable institutions
out of their life-time savings. What motivated them?
Scottish psychiatrist, Ronald David Laing (1927-1989), stressed the role of
society , and particularly the family , in the development of an individual
mind. He ar gued that individuals can often be put in impossible situations,
where they are unable to conform to the conflicting expectations of their
peers, leading to a 'lose-lose situation' and immense mental distress for the
individuals concerned.82 Opposite to this happens when the individual mind
affects others around it and transforms multiple lives. These experienced
individuals are like travellers who can return from the journey with
important insights, and may even have become wiser and more grounded
people as a result. They become creators of better and unprecedented lives.
When scientific or ganisations were being created in India, there was
excitement everywhere. There were a chosen few - the visionaries, the likes
of Homi Jehangir Bhabha (1909-1966), Vikram Sarabhai, Monkombu
Sambasivan (M.S.) Swaminathan (b. 1925), Daulat Singh (D.S.) Kothari
(1906-1993) - who were asked to create scientific or ganisations in the
country . Then several young people were invited to take positions in the
organisations that these visionaries conceived. Raja Ramanna (1925-2004),
Satish Dhawan (1920-2002), Roddam Narsimha (b. 1933) and C.N.R. Rao
(b. 1934) would have excelled anywhere, but they chose to work in Indian
These highly talented and committed scientists attracted talents from
universities and industrial sectors. Thousands of them, have dedicated their
lives to the great endeavours like putting a satellite into the earth' s orbit, or
creating nuclear electricity , or a ballistic missile system, or ushering in the
green revolution, and now nurturing nanotechnology .Many other gifted
people opted for administrative posts, became consultants and took up
teaching jobs. The external pressure to diversify comes from the demands
the environment places on the individual. There are many administrative
positions in which a respected name is a great asset. Accomplished scientist,
physicist, metallur gist, V.S. Arunachalam (b. 1935); and radiologist,
Kakarla Subbarao (b. 1925) were also great administrators. Their leadership
articulated on major public policy issues that have been engendered by a
There's so much beauty in science
that alliances with that is crude
collapse and per haps and cease to be abstract
and become one with life
I dive into solitude again and ther e's no end
because without infinity nothing exists
We are a developing nation. We are on our road to achieve better living
conditions for our one billion-plus people. Science and technology will
continue to advance. It is evident that science and technology is directly
linked to the generation of wealth. The modern world has stood witness to
some of the major contributions as well as disasters because of science. Is
science universal or is it that there is bad science and good science?
I believe that there is nothing like bad science or good science. Science is
indeed universal. For example, we can either use nuclear science for
producing electrical ener gy or use it for making a nuclear weapon. The
choice lies with the user . The right type of use has to come from the right
thinking. This thought led me to a deeper reflection.
Taken on its own, science is, essentially , a neutral commodity . It chooses no
sides. The results of research remain neutral, till their ascribed meaning, or
significance manifests through application. Truly controversial issues lie at
the juncture of science and man. The new ways, that may have
unanticipated moral or ethical implications, where safety or security risks
are introduced, must be balanced against the benefits achieved.
I would like to cite here the example of societal implications of
nanotechnology . I invited about 100 scientists and science administrators to
Rashtrapati Bhavan on April 29, 2004. We deliberated one full day . There
are concerns about existing and potential applications of nanotechnology . It
is still unclear how it is possible to anticipate the consequences of
nanotechnology development. Above all, it is yet to be seen how research
and debate on societal and ethical concerns can be integrated into the
research and development process.
Nanotechnology , which is the science of manipulating and characterising
matter at atomic and molecular scales, and which integrates a multitude of
science and engineering disciplines with widespread applications, warrants
caution. My personal notion is that the conver gence of information
technology , biotechnology and nanotechnology can result in intelligent,
self-replicating, nanoscale robots. Let me expand this thought process here
because this concerns the careers of many young readers of this book.
There are two types of nanostructures: (1) Nanocomposites, nanostructured
surfaces and nanocomponents (electronic, optical, sensors, etc.), something
like 'fixed' nano-particles; and (2) 'free' nanoparticles. These free
nanoparticles can be nanoscale species of elements, or simple compounds,
but also complex compounds where, for instance, a nanoparticle of a
particular element is coated with another substance, something like 'coated'
nanoparticle or 'core-shell' nanoparticle.
One application of nanotechnology is the development of smart materials.
This term refers to any material designed and engineered at the nanometer
scale to perform a specific task. These materials can be designed to respond
differently to various molecules. Such a capability can lead, for example, to
intelligent drugs which will recognize and render inert specific viruses.
There are several potential entry routes for nanoparticles into the body .
They can be inhaled, swallowed, absorbed through skin or be deliberately
injected during medical procedures (or released from implants). Once
within the body , they are highly mobile. How these nanoparticles behave
inside the or ganism is one of the big issues that need to be resolved.
Is science (or technology) safe or dangerous? Do the benefits outweigh the
risks? Are we as a nation in favour of or against a scientific and
technological innovation? Should it be promoted? Can it be regulated? How
can our answers to these questions protect mankind, and at the same time,
enable science to move forward and provide life-enhancing discoveries we
have come to expect and depend upon?
Shirley Ann Jackson84 says, "Science presents a series of knife-edge issues
- pros and cons, positives and potential negatives." Scientific solutions
have not always meshed well with policy solutions. Is it not up to the
science and engineering community , itself, to step forward and provide
leadership? Let me comment upon what is close to my heart - nuclear
Three decades ago, France, a nation with a few coal and natural gas
resources and virtually no oil resources, embraced a national nuclear power
policy for generating its electricity . Today , more than 50 French nuclear
power plants generate almost 80 per cent of that nation' s electrical power
and provide several billion dollars in annual revenues from sales of surplus
power to other European nations.
There has never been a nuclear power accident in France, and the nation
safely reprocesses much of its nuclear waste. Since its nuclear ener gy
produces no emissions, France has the lowest rate of carbon equivalent
emissions. We took of f in the nuclear electricity generation almost
concurrently with France but faced various technology control regimes.
However , decades of ef forts braving those sanctions have eventually
brought the United States to the negotiation table, opening doors for nuclear
fuel for our power generation units.
Beyond power , nuclear by-product material is used in calibration sources,
radiopharmaceuticals, bone mineral analysers, portable fluoroscopic
imaging devices, brachytherapy sources and devices and gamma
stereotactical sur gery devices. Radioisotopes are used to identify drug-
resistant strains of malaria, tuberculosis and other diseases; radiation is used
in sterilising bone, skin and other tissues required for tissue grafts to heal
serious injuries; and nuclear techniques are used to optimise malnutrition
studies. Nuclear medicine is a speciality in almost all good Indian hospitals.
Agricultural productivity is enhanced by the development of new plant
varieties through radiation-induced mutation. Researchers are working on
using nuclear techniques to develop new plant strains adaptable to
cultivation in saline lands. Isotope hydrology is used to map under ground
aquifers to improve groundwater management, as well as to investigate and
recover from contamination events. We are in the game but need to develop
The societal, economic and 'quality of life' impact of scientific discoveries
and technological innovations is very well-known today .85 All developed
countries, without exception, are strong in science and technology . What is
happening in our science and technology institutions? The number of post-
graduates in engineering and the physical sciences - and even in the
computer sciences - are on the decline. Young talent is flocking to the
booming information technology enabled services job market. How do we
In the past, we imported the science, engineering, and technological
expertise we needed. All developing countries do that. The transition to a
developed country must see indigenous innovation and capacity building in
science and technology . We, undoubtedly , have immense talent that has not
yet been channelled and harnessed. Young women and socially mar ginalised
youth are yet to be initiated into science and mathematics. These groups
offer India af firmative opportunity to construct the science and engineering
workforce of the future.
Consider what it will take to do this: In about ten years (by the year 2015),
our under graduate population will expand by more than 10 million students.
Five million of them will be students from these under -represented groups.
Will this cohort want to study science and mathematics? What is going to
spark and nurture their interest?
How do we ensure that they will be prepared, academically , to advance in
science? If these young people have the desire and the preparation, will they
have the means? Fewer than 10 per cent of youth in the lowest family
income quartile go to college, compared with about 80 per cent of the top
quartile income families. What are we doing to remedy this?
If these young people are willing, if they are prepared, and if they are
financially able, then we will have bridged the science talent gap. Our
challenge is to make this happen. The future scientific prowess of India
depends upon closing the talent gap, which we can do only if we discover
all the talent. But we shall have to take pains. It takes more than post-
secondary education remediation strategies, or making 'merit-based
decisions' about university admissibility . The fight cannot begin at the
Moreover , educating for a livelihood is one goal. Educating for leadership is
another . The leadership-oriented education empowers the individual with
knowledge, not only of theories, but also of their mutual and true relations
in life. All fields of study narrow as specialisation increases. The totally
narrow view is myopic and ultimately faulty . The antidote is a basis in
multidisciplinary approaches to problem-solving, and a broader education
No mafic r ock is ther e on earth
Can hide the secr et of its birth;
Wher e other methods try and fail.
Trace elements alone pr evail.
My faith I place in my inheritance,
All other gr ound is sinking sand.86
There is a growing need for scientists to communicate.
As complexity grows, so does the need for scientists to collaborate and
work in teams, where the need to understand, explain, persuade and
emphasise pertains. A young scientist entering industry today spends much
time explaining science to consumers, legislators, policy-makers,
environmentalists, judges, lawyers and the media. There is a greater -than-
ever need for scientists themselves to heighten respect for scientific and
technological solutions, and to alleviate a cultural fear of science. Scientists
must understand and be governed by the social consequences of their work.
Society will also need technologically knowledgeable, but broadly educated
individuals in its public of fices.
Scientists never claim absolute knowledge. Unlike a mathematical proof, a
proven scientific theory is always open to revaluation, if new evidence is
presented. Even the most basic and fundamental theories may turn out to be
imperfect if new observations are inconsistent with them. Critical to this
process is making every relevant aspect of research publicly available,
which permits peer review of published results, and also allows ongoing
review and repeating of experiments and observations by multiple
researchers operating independently of one another .Transparency is the
hallmark of a scientific temper .
In India, faith is held sacred. It is not very uncommon to see anecdotal
claims about scientific impossibilities. Scientists are dared to debate over
metaphysical issues. Science is reason-based analysis of sensation upon our
awareness. As such, the scientific method cannot deduce anything about the
realm of the reality that is beyond what is noticeable by already existing or
There is a principle of parsimony . All scientific theories are formulated and
the most promising theory is selected after analysing the collected evidence.
Some of the findings of science can be very counter -intuitive. Atomic
theory , for example, implies that a granite boulder which appears as a
heavy , hard, solid, grey object is actually a combination of subatomic
particles with none of these properties, moving very rapidly in space where
the mass is concentrated in a very small fraction of the total volume. Many
of preconceived notions about the workings of the universe have been
challenged by new scientific discoveries. Quantum mechanics, particularly ,
examines phenomena that seem to defy our most basic postulates about
causality and fundamental understanding of the world around us.
Is there any goal of science? In my opinion, the underlying goal or purpose
of science is to produce useful models of the reality for the individual and
society . It is incorrect to say that science is totally evidence based. It is
virtually impossible to make inferences from the human senses because
their capabilities are severely limited. Humans cannot hear what bats can
and cannot see what cats can. On the other hand, people can form
hypotheses based on observations that they make in the world which is
beyond any other specie.
By analysing a number of related hypotheses, scientists can thus theorise.
These theories benefit society or human individuals who make use of them.
For example, Newton' s theory of Physics allows us to predict various
physical interactions, from the collision of one moving billiard ball with
another , to trajectories of space shuttles and satellites. Relativity can be used
to calculate the ef fects of the sun' s gravity on mass light-years away . The
social science allows us to predict, of course, with limited accuracy at this
point of time, things like economic forecasts.
Despite popular impressions of science, it is not the goal of science to
answer all questions. The goal of sciences is to answer only those that
pertain to perceived reality . Science does not and cannot produce absolute
and unquestionable truth. Rather , science tests some aspect of the world and
provides a reasonable theory to explain it.
Chemistry and biology together have transformed our ability to use and
predict chemical and biological reactions and scenarios. A molecular
scientist and Professor in the University of Tennessee, Rama Reddy
Guntaka, has three decades of hands on experience in virology and
molecular biology . He was a member of the team that discovered the proto-
oncogenes for which it was awarded the 1989 Nobel Prize. He did the
cloning and sequencing, for the first time, of the entire genome of Indian
isolates of Hepatitis C Virus. Guntaka called a worldwide patent for
Oligomers, which inhibit expression of Collagen Genes. This nucleic acid
based drug is to control or gan fibrosis in liver , kidney , lungs and
heart. Guntaka invested significantly in setting up a laboratory in Hyderabad
to do basic research in biotechnology .
While biotechnology is still in its nascent stage, other forms of technology
have become so well-established that it is easy to for get the great scientific
achievements that they represent. The refrigerator , for example, owes its
existence to a discovery that liquids take in ener gy when they evaporate, a
phenomenon known as latent heat. The principle of latent heat was first
exploited in a practical way in 1876, and the refrigerator has played a major
role in maintaining public health ever since. The first automobile, dating
from the 1880s, made use of many advances in physics and engineering,
including reliable ways of generating high-voltage sparks. The first
computers emer ged in the 1940s from simultaneous advances in Electronics
Research in food technology has created new ways of preserving and
flavouring what we eat. Research in industrial chemistry has created a vast
range of plastics and other synthetic materials, which have thousands of
uses at home and in industry . Synthetic materials are easily formed into
complex shapes and can be used to make machines, electrical and
automotive parts, scientific and industrial instruments, decorative objects,
containers and many other items.
Along with these achievements, science has also brought about technology
that helps save human life. The dialysis machine enables many people to
survive kidney diseases that once proved fatal. Artificial valves allow
sufferers of valvular heart disease to return to active living. Biochemical
research is responsible for the antibiotics and vaccinations that protect us
from infectious diseases, and for a wide range of other drugs used to
combat specific health problems. As a result, most people on the planet now
live longer and enjoy themselves healthier lives than ever before.
However , scientific discoveries also have a negative impact in human
affairs. Industrial and agricultural chemicals pollute the environment. City
air is contaminated by toxic gases from vehicular exhausts. The burning of
fossil fuels such as coal, oil and natural gas releases into the atmosphere
carbon dioxide and other substances known as greenhouse gases. These
gases have altered the composition of the entire atmosphere, producing
global warming and the prospect of major climatic changes in the years to
Here the metaphor of Brownian motion comes to my mind. Consider a lar ge
balloon of 10 metres in diameter . Imagine this lar ge balloon in any widely
crowded area. The balloon is so lar ge that it lies on top of many members of
the crowd. Since they are excited, each one hits the balloon at dif ferent
times and in dif ferent directions with the motions being completely random.
In the end, the balloon is pushed in random directions such that the
movement is nullified. Assume that the force is exerted at a certain time. We
might have 20 people pushing right, and 21 others pushing left, where each
supporter is exerting equivalent amount of force. In this case, the forces
exerted from the left side and the right side are imbalanced in favour of the
left side; the balloon will move slightly to the left. This imbalance exists at
all times, and it causes random motion. If we look at this situation from
above, we see the lar ge balloon as a small object animated by erratic
Now return to Brown' s pollen particle swimming randomly in water . A
water molecule is about 1 nano metre, where the pollen particle is roughly 1
mirco metre in diameter , 1,000 times lar ger than a water molecule. So, the
pollen particle can be considered as a very lar ge balloon constantly being
pushed by water molecules. The Brownian motion of particles in a liquid is
due to the instantaneous imbalance in the force exerted by the small liquid
molecules on the particle. The nation' s balloon is moved in a similar way by
the hundreds of thousands of people pushing it in thousands of
organisations. What we see as the performance of the Indian nation is
indeed the resultant performance of millions of or ganised ef forts.
"There is no Indian science. Instead, Indian scientists are dealing with
foreign science," feels Raj Reddy (b. 1937), the Mozah Bint Nasser
University Professor of Computer Science and Robotics at Carnegie Mellon
University . Raj Reddy told me that rural youth, even though they may be
gifted and have high IQ, do not succeed in national competitive exams
because most such exams require English, verbal, quantitative and
analytical skills that they have never been taught. He is involved in setting
up a 21st Century Gurukulam in Andhra Pradesh. It will be a postgraduate
residential IT academy for gifted rural graduates. The big Indian balloon is
too big to be meaningfully pushed by a few million enthusiasts . The giant
of rural India must awake. The rural youth deserve a more dif ferent destiny
than that of a peasant.

Education as a Spiritual Journey
Every citizen has a right to live with dignity; every citizen has a right to
aspire for distinction. Availability of opportunities to resort to just and fair
means is what democracy is all about.87
Every year on 5th September , India celebrates its teachers. The day is
remembered as Teacher 's Day to commemorate the birth anniversary of
India' s second President and teacher - philosopher , Sarvepalli
Radhakrishnan (1888-1975). His dream was that "T eachers should be the
best minds in the country ." Distinguished teachers come to New Delhi and
receive awards. I did the honours during my tenure as the President of
India. Each time, I made it a point to interact with them and listen to their
experiences. Many facts emer ge from their polite but forthright accounts. I
have come to know through them the pain experienced by many educators
in the contemporary India.
One high school teacher from Maharashtra has highlighted the pain of
disconnection. This disconnection is from colleagues, students and, above
all, from his heart.
The culture, the size of the schools and attitudes of parents have changed so
much that they appear strange, according to the teacher . There is an
apparent emphasis upon achieving marks and gaining admission
into'prestigious' colleges. This pressure to 'achieve' has taken its toll on
young minds and hence devastating the humane virtue of patience and
gratitude. Optimism and collective commitment are getting scarce in our
educational institutions. Intrusion of selfishness is evident. Some
entrepreneurs see profits in education and hence reduce it to a mere service
industry . This is not without grave social consequences.
I met fifteen spiritual leaders at Surat in October 2003 at the camp of
Acharya Mahaprajna (b. 1920), the 10th Acharya of Terapanth. They
belonged to various religions including Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity ,
Islam and Sikhism. We released the Surat Spiritual Declaration.88 The
religious leaders were concerned that education in majority of schools,
particularly in the small towns, is taming the young minds with dogma and
obsolete concepts rather than empowering them with freedom of
enquiry .Instead of allowing the buds of their spirits to blossom, the attempt
is to dictate zealously the desirable outcomes of education in the life of the
student. The Surat declaration was an attempt to safeguard young Indian
minds from a spirituality of compliance. Spiritual tradition as a template,
against which the ideas, beliefs and behaviour of the students are to be
measured, is the last thing that must govern the education in our country of
great cultural diversity . The idea 'to shape' the student to the 'template' by
the time his or her formal education concludes is indeed ominous.
Spirituality instead must form a vision of that which stands beyond, behind
and within the passing flux of immediate things. Can we define spirituality
to a young student without introducing his/her to religious terms?
First and foremost, it is important to know the distinction between
spirituality in religion and spirituality as contrasting to religion. In recent
years, spirituality in religion has often carried connotations of a believer
having faith more personal, less dogmatic, more open to new ideas and
myriad influences, and more pluralistic than the faiths of established
religions. It also can connote the nature of a believer 's personal relationship
or connection with his/her God or belief system, as opposed to the general
relationship with the deity understood to be shared by all members of that
I see spirituality as something which is real, to be explored by a close
attention to our immediate world, and yet waiting to be realised. Spirituality
is the capacity to dream, visualising something which is a remote prospect
and yet the greatest of present possibilities of our life. I see spirituality as
something which embeds us in harmonious relationships with others, and
yet, at times, will require a journey in solitude. To me, a spiritual vision is
one that makes us participants in the unfolding of the universe. Spirituality
is, indeed, all about connectivity with the cosmos. It can be described as a
vision requiring the exercise of mind, heart and body . A vision should be
replete with consequences for any action.90
I feel spirituality is trust in the slow work of God. Young students are, quite
naturally , impatient to reach the end without delay . They like to skip the
intermediate stages; they are impatient of being on the way to something
unknown, something new . I want them to understand that it is the law of all
progress that it must pass through some stage of instability .
Young students must learn to let their dreams mature gradually - let them
grow . Let them shape themselves, without undue haste. Don' t try to force
them on. Grace and circumstances acting on your own goodwill will
certainly help you realise your dreams.
I have seen in my own life that those who spread their sails in the right way
to the winds of the earth have always found themselves borne by a current
towards the open seas. The more nobly a person wills and acts, the more
avid he/she becomes for great and sublime aims to pursue. He/She is no
longer content with family , country and the remunerative aspect of his/her
work. He/She, indeed, wants wider or ganisations to create, new paths to
tread, causes to uphold, truths to discover and ideals to cherish and defend.
Authentic spirituality wants to expose us to the truth - whatever truth may
be and wherever it may take us. Such spirituality does not dictate where we
must go, but trusts that any path walked on with integrity will take us to a
place of knowledge. Such spirituality encourages us to welcome diversity
and conflict, to tolerate ambiguity and to embrace paradox. By this
understanding, the spirituality of education is not about dictating ends; it is
about examining and clarifying the inner sources of teaching and learning.
It is a process that rids us of the toxins that poison our hearts and minds.91
Rumi described the purpose of life "to know as we are known".92 This is
not easy today . The prevailing mode of knowing in education is rooted not
only in fear but also in insecurity . It is creating disconnections between
teachers, their subjects and their students. There is a need to look beyond
knowledge inspired by a desire to control the surroundings and other
people. The study of economics to dominate resources is knowledge as an
end in itself. The study of applied sciences is a means to a practical end.
There is another kind of knowledge that is open to us; the knowledge that
originates in compassion or love. The profession of medicine and nursing
thrives on this knowledge.
The goal of knowledge arising from love is bridging the individual that is
separated out from the web of life around. Knowledge born of compassion
aims not only at exploiting and manipulating the conditions but also at
reconciling the world to itself. The mind motivated by compassion reaches
out to know as the heart reaches out to love. Here, the act of knowing
becomes an act of love. In such knowing, we know and are known as
members of one community , Vasudeiva Kutumbakam , and this becomes a
way of reweaving the bonds of community ensuring the safety and well-
being of all, Yogakshemam Vahamyaham. 93
An interesting concept of polarities elevated disconnection into an
intellectual virtue.94 Nobel Prize-winning Danish physicist, Niels Bohr
(1885-1962), said, "Opposite of a true statement is a false statement, but the
opposite of a pr ofound truth can be another pr ofound truth." If there is a
day, there must be a night. If there is pleasure, there must be suf fering. In
certain circumstances, truth is not choosing between one or another but by
embracing both. In certain circumstances, truth is a paradoxical joining of
apparent opposites. If we want to know the truth, we must learn to embrace
those opposites as one. The secular fabric of the Indian society is a living
example of this truism.
To teach is to connect the individual with the reality .It, indeed, involves
creating a bridging spiritual formation. Three spiritual practices are
important: (1) the study of sacred texts, (2) the practice of prayer and
contemplation, and (3) the community life. In Buddhism, it is so articulately
said: Buddham sharnam gachhami, Dharmam sharnam gachhami,
Sangham sharnam gachhami - to the Buddha I go, to good conduct I go, to
The community indeed is a rich and complex network of relationships in
which we must both speak and listen, and make claims on others, and make
ourselves accountable. The cultivation of such communities of the truth
should be our goal or objective as educators. A form of community that has
the capacity to support authentic education must emer ge among our
In September 2006, I visited Veeriya Vandayar Memorial Sri Pushpam
College, Thanjavur . Veeriya Vandayar founded this institution fifty years
ago in an interior region for providing the benefits of education to the rural
masses. Three essential dimensions of a good educational campus come to
my mind: openness, boundaries and an air of hospitality .
The educator and the participants work to clear away the clutter - whether
those are meaningless words, pressure to get on with the daily round,
obstructive feelings. The openness of a space is held by its boundaries.
Learning can be painful if it is not structured. For this reason, hospitality is
essential. Hospitality means receiving each other , our struggles, our
newborn ideas, with openness and care. In a good classroom, truth is
central. It is a place where every stranger and every strange utterance is
Learning spaces should invite people to speak truly and honestly . People
need to be able to express their thoughts and feelings. This involves
building environments so that individuals may speak and where groups may
gather and give voice to their concerns and passions. Learning spaces
should honour people' s experiences, give room to stories about everyday
life. At the same time, we need to connect these stories with the lar ger
picture. We need to be able to explore how our personal experiences fit in
with those of others; and how they may relate to more general stories and
We cannot expect to reform education if we fail to cherish and challenge the
human heart that is the source of good teaching. Good teaching is much
more than technique. Good teaching, indeed, comes from the identity and
integrity of the teacher . This means that they both know themselves, and
that they are seeking to live life as well as they can. They are able to be in
touch with themselves, with their students and their subjects - and act in
ways that further flourishes the wholeness of the students.96
Teaching, like any other human activity , emer ges from within. As I teach, I
project the condition of my soul onto my students, my subjects and our way
of being together . When I do not know myself, I cannot know who my
students are. I will only see them through a dark glass of my ignorance, in
the shadows of my unexamined life - and when I cannot see them clearly , I
cannot teach them well. When I do not know myself, I cannot know my
subject - especially at the deepest levels of embodied, personal meaning. I
will know it only abstractly , from a distance, a congeries of concepts as far
removed from the world as I am from personal truth. If we do not know
who we are, then we cannot know those we work with, or the subjects we
Many of us were called to teach by encountering not only a mentor , but also
a particular field of study .We are drawn to a body of knowledge, because it
shed light on our identity as well as on the world. We did not merely find a
subject to teach - the subject also found us. Remaining open to that calling,
listening for the voice of other subjects is vital if we are to sustain ourselves
and our enthusiasm as educators.
Teaching is not a profession; it is a calling, a voice of moral demand that
asks us to become someone we are not yet - someone dif ferent, someone
better and someone just beyond our reach. A career in teaching is not for
achievement but is a gift to be received. The voice of vocation is not 'out
there' but within us calling me to be the person I was born to be, to fulfil the
original selfhood given to me at birth by God. The authentic call to teach
"comes from the voice of the teacher within, the voice that calls me to
honour the nature of my true self."98
My friend G. Venkataraman, an accomplished teacher in his own right,
narrates a story about C.V . Raman in his book 'The Big and the Small' .
Raman was in the first batch of Bharat Ratna Award winners. President
Rajendra Prasad wrote to Raman inviting him to be his personal guest in
Rashtrapati Bhavan. Raman regretted explaining that he was guiding a PhD
student and that the thesis was positively due and the student was valiantly
trying to wrap it all up. Raman felt that he had to be by the side of his
student, to ensure that his thesis was completed. He signed the thesis as the
Guide, and then had it submitted. He considered staying with his student as
his duty and gave up the pomp of a glittering ceremony associated with the
highest honour of the land.
What soil is to life on the earth, teachers are to society .Teachers, like soil,
are the stage on which the human generations and other constructs of
human knowledge are physically supported. Just as soil shelters seeds and
provides physical support for their roots as they germinate, grow and
mature into adult plants that create seed and thus perpetuate the cycle,
teachers prepare and guide young minds to assume careers and become
engines of growth and progress. Soil stores elements that, in the proper
proportions and availability , act as nutrients for the plants growing in it.
Similarly , teachers store and preserve tradition. Soil plays a central role in
the decomposition of dead, or ganic matter . In doing so, not only it renders
many harmless potential pathogens, including those af fecting humans, but
also adds to its store of potential nutrients. Likewise, teachers absorb the
juvenile impulses and tame youthful beasts. Like soils of various kinds,
acting in concert, are a critical factor in regulating the major elemental
cycles of the earth - those of carbon, nitrogen and sulphur , some of which,
such as carbon, play a vital role in the cycles of global climate, teachers
sustain and refine culture. Just as the soil is the banquet table that feeds the
multitudinous or ganisms living within and upon the earth - including
humans, similarly , any society and its edifice is erected on good, noble
The earth is used as metaphor for the reality . The term reality , in its widest
sense, includes everything that is, whether it is noticeable, comprehensible,
or self-contradictory by science, philosophy , or any other system of
analysis. Reality in this sense may include both being and nothingness.
When two or more individuals agree upon the interpretation and experience
of a particular event, a consensus about an event and its experience begins
to be formed. This being common to a few individuals or a lar ger group,
then becomes the 'truth' as seen and agreed upon by a certain set of people.
Thus, one particular group may have a certain set of agreed truths, while
another group might have a dif ferent set of truths that have reached
Different communities and societies have varied and extremely dif ferent
notions of reality and truth of the external world. The religion and beliefs of
people or communities are a fine example of this level of reality .Poetess
No matter what you know ,
someone is always wanting to corr ect you,
to sell you a list of goods,
from the shop marked 'authority'.
All the 'authorities' got
years ago after the gr eat flood
wiped out original knowledge,
and left behind only these granite shadows.
Reality is always soft clay ,
ever shifting and changing its shape.
Fire it into form, and
at the very moment
you ar e hailing it as final truth
it will br eak in your hands.100
Like the human societies have been and are inextricably tied to the soil for
reasons beyond measurable riches, for the historical wealth of the earth is
archived in the soil, a wealth that nurtures cultures even as it sustains life,
we need to conserve our teachers. Although we humans think of this wealth
as 'raw materials' yet it is part of the atomic interchange in which each
rock, microbe, butterfly , tree, drop of water , grain of sand and human being
shares the ever journeying atoms of material creation. All of us, the
successful, the creative, the virtuous, the resourceful people, were supported
and nourished by our teachers. Let us go back to teaching before we leave
this planet and become the manure to nourish the saplings of the future
generations. Any society , that does not respect its teachers, eventually
I spoke to a wide cross-section of teachers to understand the struggles of a
middle-class teacher working in a poor urban school. Four problems have
emer ged, namely low pay and prestige, distant and incompetent
administration, students with social and economic problems and negligent
or absent parents. In smaller cities, the problems of teachers have been
compounded by general lowering of standards, social discrimination,
increasing concerns about safety , infusion of money in getting into good
schools and pressure to allot more marks and pass students on to the next
Today' s students live in a world that is extremely fast-paced, constantly
changing, increasingly culturally diverse, technologically driven and media-
saturated. We cannot continue to deliver a 20th century , scientific-
management, factory-model education. This new context of the 21st century
requires that we redefine 'education', 'school', 'curriculum', 'teacher ' and
'learner '. It requires that we provide an education designed to help our
students truly succeed. I feel our education system needs to transform itself
from a preaching to a coaching mode.
The onset of the third millennium of human history is a young and tender
time, with much at stake. Yet, it may well prove to be another time of
unprecedented opportunity for science and technology . Science, discovery
and technological innovation alone can provide food, shelter , clothing,
education, health and quality of life for all.
You see a smile on the faces of children when they are toddlers. They smile
because they are blossoming innocently . When they come to their teens, the
smiles slowly fade away and the signs of apprehension appear .When they
complete their education, the top-most questions in their minds are, 'What
would they do after their education? Will they get an employment?' The
parents, who have spent all their savings on their children' s education, also
share the same concern. Concerns about employment are not only for those
who are fortunate enough to have school and college education. It is the
same fading away of the smiles, the shattering of the dreams and the
weaning away of the gleam in the eyes that we see in every cross-section of
youth in the country .The only answer to retain the smile from the child to
the youth is to generate employment. It represents the aspirations and
anxiety of nearly 540 million youth of India.
Unless India accelerates the process of societal transformation and raises its
standard of governance and safeguards the sanctity of its public institutions,
the possibility that ignorance and fear can interfere with - and even halt -
its growth is not very remote. I personally believe that a scientific mindset
guided by conscience, consensus, and by actions that take the complex
values of our social and moral worlds into account is what we need to build
at all levels of our system. We have but no choice. We have a lot of work to
do. There is a great deal at stake.
E p i l o g u e
To pen a foreword for Dr . Kalam' s book, 'You ar e Born to Blossom' , is a
singular honour . It is a rare privilege to provide a commentary on the
reflections of such a distinguished man: scholar , scientist, leader of India' s
space programme and the much-loved 1 1th President of the world' s most
populous democracy . It is also a considerable challenge, for any words of
mine appear pedestrian and insignificant next to writing of such perspective
Chapter headings such as 'The W ooing of Grain and Clay', 'The T reble of
Heaven' s Harmony' and 'Specks in Br ownian Motion' give a flavour of the
variety of the themes that he explores. Taking education, learning and
teaching as the backdrop to his reflections, he writes about the human life-
cycle, relationships within families, the significance of work, attributes of
leadership, the nature of science, spirituality and moral choices. In
exploring these themes, he demonstrates an erudite and loving familiarity
not only with India' s rich corpus of classical and modern writings, but also
with thinkers and authors from all the cultures of the world over .
It is also a personal book that recalls many of the steps in Dr . Kalam' s own
emotional, moral and intellectual development in ways that are certain to
plunge readers into recollections of the people and institutions that helped
them blossom. By reading this book, I was transported to the memories of
my mother reciting poetry and to the book written by my grandfather who
was a self-taught man of modest background. He wrote a book about
Scottish essayist, Thomas Carlyle (1795-1881) alongside his job in the
Excise Department. He inculcated in me love for mathematics.
reminded me of Christ' s Hospital, created as an orphanage for the
City of London by Edward VI (1537-1553) and brilliantly fulfilling to date
its mission to educate poor children. The school struck a beautiful balance
between discipline and freedom.
In my later years, alongside my specialised formal studies of science and
mathematics, I was able to explore three foreign languages, develop an
appreciation of art and read widely .
Compared to this rich and stimulating secondary education, Oxford
University , at first, seemed rather dull, but it, too, endowed me with lasting
assets. Producing a weekly essay was the main vehicle for learning; a
discipline that gave me a lifelong taste for writing. Paradoxically , this most
collegial of universities also prepared the ground for my later love af fair
with distance learning. Oxford is indeed a seat of learning, not a place of
Academics give lectures, certainly , but they are a mar ginal feature of the
intellectual environment. The library , the essay and the tutorial are the route
to learning. Study at Oxford is an ef fective distance education.
'You ar e born to blossom' opens up so many topics for reflection, poses so
many practical challenges and asks so many profound questions that each
reader will begin his/her unique intellectual journey . Coming, as I do, from
a Western academic tradition, it is both challenging and exciting to read a
work that moves so readily from analysis to synthesis; that emphasises both
the collective and the individual; and that takes the Universe, no less, as the
source of guidance for education.
The proper use of science and technological innovation for human purposes
is a theme that runs through this work. The author notes that this is a time of
unprecedented opportunity for science and technology because the world' s
population will double by the middle of this century . He ar gues that
discovery and innovation can provide food, shelter , clothing, education,
health and quality of life for all these people. He states:
"I dr eam that by 2020, schools in India will go fr om buildings to symbiotic
nerve centr es, with walls that ar e por ous and transpar ent, connecting
teachers, students and the community to the wealth of knowledge that exists
in the world. The teacher will be or chestrating learning rather than
dispensing information. T eachers would help students turn information into
knowledge, and knowledge into wisdom. People of all ages will seek
learning to pr epare for life in the r eal world."
How can India' s present reality be transformed into Dr . Kalam' s dream? In
my work at UNESCO and now at the Commonwealth of Learning, I have
enjoyed familiarising myself with education in India. I find that the country
already has in place most of the elements necessary to achieve the dream of
its people. Indeed, the author ur ges Indians to have far greater confidence in
their own achievements. Many of the policies and structures are already
essayed. The challenge is to convert them into systems that bring teachers,
learners and technology together in ways that are true to the high ideals of
teaching and learning articulated in this ambitious book.
I refer , of course, to the EduSat satellite system, of which Dr . Kalam was
one of the original architects, but equally to the arrangements for distance
learning that India is putting in place at both school and university
levels. Distance learning is a dry term that sounds like a behaviourist parody
of the rich environments for learning that are described in this book. But
beneath the dusty term lies a revolutionary reality that can be a vehicle for
many of the reforms necessary to realise the dream.
India has created, through policies, technologies and institutions such as its
open universities and open schools, the ingredients for making the paradigm
shift that Dr . Kalam calls for . Now it needs people of vision and inspiration
to blend the ingredients together . His book will nurture their vision and their
Distance learning shares its first revolutionary feature with other
applications of technology to the manufacture of products and the provision
of services. Using various media, from print to the web, high-quality
learning materials can be developed with low-unit costs. This makes
education more accessible and more af fordable. Open universities bring
together teams of academics and experts to develop their courses, a singular
innovation that converts teaching, like research, into a collective endeavour .
Academics benefit from the robust but constructive criticism of their
teaching materials from fellow team members. Students benefit from
exploring a variety of perspectives and are encouraged to reach their own
However , as this book ar gues powerfully , learning requires a good teacher
and a comprehensive learner centric material. Distance learning has also
invented or rather recovered, since times. In ef fective distance learning
systems, the tutor metaphorically walks along with the student, as in the
passage from Camus that Dr . Kalam quotes with approval at the end of
"Don' t walk in front of me; I may not follow . Don' t walk behind me; I may
not lead. Just walk beside me and be my friend."
An aspiration that runs through this book is that "people of all ages will seek
learning". Some ar gue that it is only with the maturity of adulthood that
people are able to work out the truth for themselves. The experience of open
universities, in India and across the world, is that, by combining learning
materials with tutors who accompany students with respect and humility ,
distance learning can provide an ideal environment for older people. During
my years as a vice-chancellor , hundreds of students told me, often with
deep emotion, how their tutor -friend had helped them achieve the
confidence that comes from finding new truths. Only through study later in
life had they realised that they were indeed 'born to blossom' .
The successful open universities continue to proclaim idealism about
learning and human growth that is increasingly rare in conventional
education systems characterised by the 'pain of disconnection' of which Dr .
Kalam speaks in . I am sure he will approve of the sentiments
expressed by Lord Crowther , speaking as Chancellor at the inauguration of
the British Open University a few days after the cosmonauts had returned
from the first landing on the moon in 1969:
"What a happy chance it is that we start on this task, in this very week when
the Universe has opened. The limits not only of explorable space, but also
of human understanding, are infinitely wider than what we believed. I am
reminded of Milton' s description of an even greater return from Outer
Space with mission accomplished. The Planets in their stations listening
stood, while the bright Pomp ascended jubilant. 'Open ye everlasting gates,'
they sang, 'Open ye heavens your living doors. Let in the great Creator ,
from his work returned; Magnificent, His six days work, a World.' "
President, Commonwealth of Learning
E n d n o t e s
1. Address to the students of the University of Mauritius, Port Louis, on 13
March 2006. Mauritius is an island nation of f the coast of Africa in the
southwest Indian Ocean. The first Indian came to Mauritius in 1835. In the
beginning of the 20th century , 200,000 to 300,000 Indians were in
Mauritius. Mahatma Gandhi stayed in Mauritius for two weeks in 1901
when he was travelling to India from South Africa. Today , there are 800,000
to 900,000 people of Indian origin who have settled here since then.
2. Albert Einstein published in the Annalen der Physik journal in 1905 his
work on Brownian motion, the photoelectric ef fect and special relativity .
Only the work on the photoelectric ef fect was mentioned in the Nobel Prize
given in 1921 where Einstein proposed the simple description of light
quanta. The light quanta are now called photons. The Einstein theory of
general relativity was still disputed.
3. The outermost part of the earth' s interior is made up of two layers: the
lithosphere comprising the crust and the solidified uppermost part of the
mantle. Below the lithosphere lies the asthenosphere which comprises the
inner viscous part of the mantle. The mantle behaves like a superheated and
extremely viscous liquid. The lithosphere essentially floats on the
asthenosphere. The lithosphere has broken up into what are called tectonic
plates - in the case of the earth, there are ten major and many minor plates.
These plates move in relation to one another .
4. Dana Cook Grossman, Seeing Life Whole, Dartmouth Medicine,
Dartmouth Medical School, Summer 2006. "Life is a learning process for
which there is no wholly adequate preparation. Although liberal education
isn't perfect yet it is the best preparation for life and its exigencies."
5. Watson, Peter , Ideas: A History fr om Fir e to Fr eud, Phoenix, 2005. In
Greece, India and China, more than 2,000 years ago, there were sceptics
who doubted whether the categories of human thought could correctly
represent the world, but the recognition that these categories change
significantly over time is distinctly modern. Thanks to thinkers such as Vico
and Herder , Hegel and Marx, Nietzsche and Foucault, the notion that ideas
have a history is an integral part of the way we think today .
6. La ilaha illa Huwa. Holy Quran, Ghafir (The For giver) Verse 40 : 3.
"Who for gives sin, accepts repentance, is strict in punishment, and has a
long reach. There is no god but He. To Him is the final goal."
7. The Kalama Sutra (Anguttara-Nikaya, Vol. I). In this Sutra, Gautama
Buddha passes through the village of Kesaputra and is greeted by the
people who live there: the Kalamas.
The Kalamas greet the Buddha and ask many wandering holy men and
ascetics pass through the village, expounding their teachings and criticizing
others, 'Whose teachings should they follow?' In response, the Buddha
delivered a sutra that serves as an entry-point to Buddhist beliefs to those
unconvinced by revelatory experiences.
8. Vergil was an ancient Roman poet. These lines are from The Aeneid, a
Latin epic written by Virgil in the 1st century BC. The epic tells the
legendary story of Aeneas, akin to Indian hero Rama. Aeneas travelled to
Italy where he became the ancestor of the Romans.
9. Faris, Nabih Amin (T ranslator), The Book of Knowledge by Imam al-
Gazzali (RA), Idara Isha'at-e-Diniyat, 2005. Al-Gazzali is one of the most
celebrated scholars in the history of Islamic thought. His 1 1th century book
entitled " The Incoher ence of the Philosophers " marks a major turn in
Islamic epistemology . "All causal events and interactions are not the
product of material conjunctions but rather the immediate and present will
10. Atkins, John Alfred, Arthur Koestler , N. Spearman, 1956. "Einstein' s
space is no closer to reality than Van Gogh' s sky . The glory of science is not
in a truth more absolute than the truth of Bach or Tolstoy , but in the act of
creation itself. The scientist' s discoveries impose his own order on chaos, as
the composer or painter imposes his; an order that always refers to limited
aspects of reality , and is based on the observer 's frame of reference, which
differs from period to period as a nude by Rembrant dif fers from a nude by
11. Thomas B. Ward, Ronald A. Finke, Steven M. Smith, Creativity and the
Mind: Discovering the Genius W ithin, Plenum, 1995. The Theory of
Multiple Intelligences (MI) tells us that our intelligences are multifaceted.
There are, at least, eight types of intelligences in us: Bodily-Kinesthetic,
Interpersonal, Intrapersonal, Linguistic, Logical-Mathematical, Musical,
Naturalist and Spatial. Each of us possesses all of these intelligences but to
varying degrees. These intelligences do not work in isolation but in concert.
12. Patrick Kavanagh (1904-1967) was an Irish poet. These lines are from
his poem 'The Seed and The Soil' included in Selected Poems of Patrick
Kavanagh, edited by Antoinette Quinn, Penguin Twentieth Century
Classics, Penguin Books, 1996.
13. Lin Yutang, The W isdom of India, Jaico Publishing House, 2005. "It is
easy to see why the Chinese mind cannot develop a scientific method, for
the scientific method, besides being analytical, always involves an amount
of stupid drudgery , while the Chinese believe in flashes of commonsense
and insight. And inductive reasoning, carried over to human relationships
(in which the Chinese are primarily interested) often results in a form of
stupidity not so rare in American universities. There are today doctorate
dissertations in the inductive method which would make Bacon turn in his
grave. No Chinese could possibly be stupid enough to write a dissertation
on ice-cream, and after a series of careful observations, announce the
staggering conclusion that 'the primary function of sugar (in the
manufacture of ice-cream) is to sweeten it'; or after a methodical study in
'Time and Motion Comparison on Four Methods of Dishwashing' happily
perceive that 'stooping and lifting are fatiguing' ."
14. Sylvain Ctti and Tom Healy , The W ell-Being of Nations, Organisation
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 2001. "Human and
social capital can be of key importance in contributing to a wide range of
positive outcomes, including higher income, life satisfaction and social
15. Technology Vision 2020, Technology Information, Forecasting &
Assessment Council, New Delhi, 1996.
TIFAC had taken up the challenge of delivering a Technology Vision for
India for 2020 to provide directions for national initiatives in Science &
Technology and a strong basis for a policy framework not only for
investment but also for the development of an integrated science and
technology policy . Five areas were identified, namely Value-addition in
agriculture, education, health, connectivity , strategic industries. Later , Dr.
Kalam added composite rural development plan PURA.
16. Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, Courier Dover Publications, 1997.
Marcus Aurelius had been a Roman Emperor since 161 BC to his death. He
was the last of the 'Five Good Emperors' who governed the Roman Empire
from 96 BC to 180 BC, and is also considered one of the most important
stoic philosophers. Meditations, written on campaign between 170 BC-180
BC, is still revered as a literary monument to a government of service and
duty and has been praised for its "exquisite accent and its infinite
17. Albert Camus, The Stranger , Matthew Ward (T ranslator), Vintage;
Reissue edition, 1989. Camus was the second youngest recipient of the
Nobel Prize for Literature (after Rudyard Kipling) when he received the
award in 1957. Camus preferred persons to ideas. " Now the only moral
value is courage, which is useful her e for judging the puppets and
chatterboxes who pr etend to speak in the name of the people..."
18. Convocation address at Nizam' s Institute of Medical Sciences (NIMS),
Hyderabad, on 26 November 2002. NIMS is a Medical University of fering
PG courses in 14 Specialities and runs a 1000-bed hospital with impressive
3:1 patient-doctor ratio. There are 150 faculty members.
19. Shunryu Suzuki, Branching Str eams Flow in the Darkness, University
of California Press, 1999. Shunryu Suzuki (1904-1971) was a Japanese Zen
master of the Soto school, who played a major role in establishing
Buddhism in America. "Our tendency is to be interested in something that is
growing in the garden, not in the bare soil itself. But if you want to have a
good harvest, the most important thing is to make the soil rich and cultivate
it well," he said.
20. Ecclesiastes 9 : 1 1. Ecclesiastes is a book of the Hebrew Bible. It
reflects on the meaning of life and the best way of life. The work
emphatically proclaims all the actions of man to be inherently futile and
meaningless, as the lives of both wise and foolish men end in death. While
wisdom for the enjoyment of an earthly life is promoted, no eternal
meaning emer ges. The book suggests that one should enjoy the simple
pleasures of daily life, such as eating, drinking and enjoying in one' s work,
which are gifts from God.
21. William Butler Yeats (ed.), A Book of Irish V erse, Routledge, 2003.
These lines are from Four Ducks on a Pond written by an Irish poet,
William Allingham. Yeats was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in
22. Davidson Richard J. and Anne Harrington (Editors), Visions of
Compassion: W estern Scientists and T ibetan Buddhists Examine Human
Natur e, Oxford University Press, 2001.
23. Richard Maurice Bucke, Cosmic Consciousness, Kessinger Publishing,
1998. Canadian progressive psychiatrist, Maurice Bucke (1837-1902)
suggests that heaven is actually a form of divine perception, validating his
speculations on cosmic consciousness via his own mystical
experience. Perhaps, it is this predisposition that caused Bucke to expound
on the idea that 'cosmic' awakening comes mainly to the middle-aged.
24. Holy Quran; Verse 47 : 12. Verily, Allah will admit those who believe
and do righteous deeds, to gardens beneath which rivers flow; while those
who reject Allah, will enjoy (this world) and eat as cattle eat; and the fire
will be their abode.
25. From poem My Mentor written by David Heimbur g associated with
Nichiren Buddhist Association of America. Nichiren Buddhism is a branch
of Buddhism based on the teachings of the 13th century Japanese monk,
Nichiren. Nichiren Buddhists believe that personal enlightenment can be
achieved in this world within the practitioner 's current lifetime.
26. Anguttara Nikaya V. 159, Udayi Sutra. The Buddha and the five
qualities of a Dharma teacher . "The Dharma should be taught with the
thought: I will speak not for the purpose of material reward."
27. Faris, Nabih Amin (T ranslator), The Book of Knowledge by Imam al-
Gazzali (RA), Idara Isha'at-e-Diniyat, 2005. "The guides for the road are
the learned men, who are the heirs of the Prophet, but the times are void of
them now and only the superficial are left; most of them have been lured by
inequity and overcome by the Satan. Everyone was so wrapped up in his
immediate fortune that he came to see good as evil and evil as good. As a
result, the science of religion disappeared and the torch of the true faith was
extinguished all over the world. They duped people into believing that there
was no knowledge except such ordinances of government as the judges use
to settle disputes when the mob riots; or the type of ar gument which the
vainglorious display in order to confuse and refute; or the elaborate and
flowery language with which the preacher seeks to lure the common folk.
They did this. Apart from these three, they could find no other ways to
snare illegal profit and gain the riches of the world."
28. Hazrat Inayat Khan (1882-1927) was born in India. An accomplished
veena player , he received his spiritual training from Mohammed Abu
Hasana of the Chishti Sufi Order .Following the command of his teacher to
go to the Western world and to unite the East and the West through the
magic of music, Inayat sailed for America in 1910. His teaching strongly
emphasised the fundamental oneness of all religions. He was deeply
concerned that many of the Western religious traditions had lost knowledge
of the 'science of soul', and the prayer and meditation techniques necessary
to develop higher consciousness in mankind.
29. Camille and Kabir Helminski, Rumi: Jewels of Remembrance,
Threshold Books, 1996. These lines are from Mathnawi III: 1445-1449.
"When we are dead, seek not our tomb in the earth, but find it in the hearts
of men." "Do not build much, for I intend to have you in ruins. If you build
two hundred houses in a manner that the bees do, I shall make you as
homeless as a fly . If you are the mount Qaf in stability , I shall make you
whirl like a milestone."
30. Address at the second convocation of Dev Sanskriti Vishwavidyalaya,
Haridwar , Uttarakhand, on December 9, 2006.
31. The Complete Poems of Emily Dickinson . By Emily Dickinson, Back
Bay Books, 1976. Emily Dickinson is an archetypal American poetess. She
lived an introverted and hermetic life. Dickinson' s poems are lyrical. "I
heard a fly buzz when I die / The Stillness in the Room / Was like the
Stillness in the Air / Between the Heaves of Storm."
32. William Wordsworth, The W orks of W illiam W ordsworth .Contemporary
Publishing Company; Reissue edition, 1998. These lines are from his poem,
Upon W estminster Bridge written in 1802. Wordsworth showed the link
between human experience and the natural world.
33. SL V-3 is the name of four -stage, solid-propellant launch vehicle with a
payload capacity of less than 50 kg into a low-earth orbit with a mean
altitude of 600 km at an inclination of 47 . Following an initial failure, the
SLV-3 successfully orbited three Rohini satellites in 1980, 1981 and 1983
respectively . The SL V-3 formed the basis of the ASLV (Advanced Space
34. The Agni (Fire, one of the 5 elements of Nature) missile is an
Intermediate Range Ballistic Missile (IRBM) developed by India. It is
capable of carrying a conventional payload of 1000 kg (2,200 lb) or a
nuclear warhead. It consists of one (short range) or two stages (intermediate
range). It is rail and road mobile. It is powered by solid and/or liquid
propellants. Later , Agni-II with a range of 2,000-2,500 km was developed
as a part of the 'credible deterrence'. Agni-III was tested on July 9, 2006,
35. William A. Tiller, Science and Human T ransformation : Subtle
Ener gies, Intentionality and Consciousness, Pavior Publishing Co., 1997.
William Tiller has been a professor in the Department of Materials Science
and Engineering at Stanford University . William Tiller hypothesised how to
use one' s own intentionality to bring about beneficial changes in one' s
body . Such changes naturally lead to significant growth in the individual' s
36. Floyd Jerred, Understand the T rue Self, Trafford Publishing Co., 2005.
"Most people fail to find the treasure hidden within because they get of f
course and become lost in the storm of life. It is wrong to think that
misfortune comes from the East or the West; they originate within one' s
37. William Wordsworth, The W orks of W illiam W ordsworth .Contemporary
Publishing Company; Reissue edition, 1998. These lines are from his best-
known poem, I wander ed lonely as a cloud was first published 200 years
ago. The poem made daffodil flowers famous all over the world.
38. Wislawa Szymborska, Poems New and Collected: 1957-1997 , Harcourt,
1998. These lines are part of a Polish poem "Reality Demands."
39. The branch of philosophy that studies the nature and scope of
knowledge is called Epistemology . It primarily addresses the following
questions: "What is knowledge?",
"How is knowledge acquired?" and "What do people know?" For
something to count as knowledge, it must be true. Knowledge is, therefore,
a justified true belief.
No one would gain knowledge just by believing something that happened to
be true; one must also have a good reason for doing so.
40. Torbert, William R., The Power of Balance: T ransforming Self, Society ,
and Scientific Inquiry , Sage Publications, 1991.
41. Abdul Basit Ahmad, Abu Bakr As-Siddiq (RA): The First Caliph of
Islam, Dar-us-Salam Publications, 2001.
42. Address at the convocation of the Indian Institute of Social Welfare and
Business Management, Kolkata, on December 6, 2006.
43. Singley , Carol J., Edith Wharton: Matters of Mind and Spirit,
Cambridge University Press, 1998.
44. Venkataraman, G., Journey into Light : Life and Science of C.V. Raman,
The Indian Academy of Sciences, 1989.
45. In psychometrics, fluid and crystallised intelligence (abbreviated g and
g , respectively) are factors of intelligence test scores originally described
by British-American psychologist, Raymond Cattell (1905-1998). Fluid
intelligence is a simple, innate, general ability , which stays fairly constant
throughout life. It includes such abilities as problem-solving, memory ,
learning and pattern recognition. Crystallised intelligence is usually
described as being dependent on learning, while fluid intelligence is
independent of past experience.
46. Erikson, Erik H., Identity and the Life Cycle, W.W. Norton & Company;
47. John Donne (1572-1631) is considered to be the master of the conceit,
an extended metaphor that combines two vastly unlike ideas into a single
idea, often using imagery .One of the most famous of Donne' s conceits is
found in A Valediction: Forbidding Mourning where he compares two
lovers who are separated to the two long arms of a pair of a compass. These
lines are a part of his poem Death Be Not Pr oud.
48. Robert von Ranke Graves (1895-1985) was an iconoclast in his poetry .
He attacked cherished beliefs. He held that love was the only true subject
for poetry . Graves confined most of his poetry to short lyrics. These lines
are a part of his poem The Cool W eb.
49. Evans, T. F., Geor ge Bernar d Shaw , Routledge, 2004. Geor ge Bernard
Shaw was uniquely honoured with both a Nobel Prize (1925) for his
contribution to literature and an Oscar (1938) for Pygmalion . He was a
harsh critic of formal education. "Schools and schoolmasters, as we have
them today , are not popular as places of education and teachers are but
prisons and turnkeys respectively in which children are kept to prevent
them disturbing and chaperoning their parents," he said.
50. Albert Einstein, The W orld as I See It, Citadel Press, 2006. "Is it
advisable for one who is not an expert on economic and social issues to
express views on the subject of socialism? I believe for a number of reasons
that it is," he said.
51. Address at the Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore, on
February 2, 2006. This University is a research-intensive university with
globally acknowledged strength in science and engineering.
52. Geof f Haselhurst is a Natural Philosopher . He created an Open
Encyclopedia on the Internet, The Most Simple Science Theory of Physical
Reality , Philosophy , Physics and Metaphysics of Space & the Wave
Structure of Matter (WSM). It includes material on philosophy , physics and
metaphysics, from the ancient Greeks and Indians to modern Western
53. Richard Schantz, What Is T ruth? Walter de Gruyter , 2002, "Truth is
correspondence, truth is coherence, truth is pragmatical utility , truth is
primitive unanalysed property , and truth is misquotation."
54. Brent Schlender , Peter Drucker Sets Us Straight (On jobs, debt,
globalisation and recession), Fortune Magazine, October 12, 2003. Peter
Drucker made famous the term knowledge worker . In the Knowledge Age,
wealth is based upon the ownership of knowledge and the ability to use that
knowledge to create or improve goods and services. Product improvements
include cost, durability , suitability , timeliness of delivery and security .
55. Padma M. Sarangapani is an independent researcher of Bangalore. She
authored Constructing School Knowledge: An Ethnography of Learning in
an Indian V illage, Sage Publications, 2003. Her comments quoted here are
from her article The Gr eat Indian T radition in Seminar , September 2003.
Seminar is a highly respected monthly symposium founded by Raj and
Romesh Thaper in 1959. It is published from New Delhi.
56. Kuiper , A.J.G. Methorst, Krishnamurti , Kessinger Publishing Co., 2004.
57. Forbes, Scott H., Jiddu Krishnamurti and His Insights into Education,
Holistic Education Conference, Toronto, Canada, 1997. Scott Forbes did his
doctoral work at The University of Oxford. He wrote Holistic Education :
An Analysis of Its Ideas and Natur e, Foundation for Educational Renewal,
58. Krishnamurti, On Education, All India Press, 1974.
59. Jiddu Krishnamurti, David Bohm, The Limits of Thought, Routledge
(UK), 1999. David Joseph Bohm (1917-1992) was an American-born
quantum physicist. He worked on The Manhattan Project which succeeded
in developing and detonating three nuclear weapons in 1945. As Bohm
grew older , he became increasingly preoccupied with Eastern mysticism
and parapsychology . Gary Zukav writes in The Dancing W u Li Masters
(1979), "If Bohm' s physics, or one similar to it, should become the main
thrust of physics in the future, the dances of the East and the West could
blend in exquisite harmony . Do not be surprised if physics curricula of the
twenty-first century include classes in meditation."
60. Wright, Andrew and Francis, Leslie J., Embodied Spirituality: The Place
of Culture and Tradition in Contemporary Educational Discourse on
Spirituality , International Journal of Childr en's Spirituality , Volume: 1,
Number 2, 1997, Pages: 8-1.
61. Ralph Waldo Emerson, Emerson' s Essays, Harper Perennial, 1981.
62. Metcalfe' s law states that the value of a telecommunications network is
proportional to the square of the number of users of the system (n2). First
formulated by Robert Melancton Metcalfe (b. 1946) in regard to the
Ethernet, Metcalfe' s law explains many of the network ef fects of
communication technologies and networks such as the Internet and the
63. In 1895, Geor ge Baldwin Selden, a patent lawyer of Rochester , New
York, obtained patent for all gasoline-powered automobiles. Henry Ford
thought the Selden' s patent preposterous. "Although all invention was a
matter of evolution," he said, "yet Selden claimed genesis." The nascent
Ford Motor Company fought the patent case against an industry worth
millions of dollars. The gathering of evidence and actual court hearings
took six years. Ford lost the original case in 1909; he appealed and won in
1911. His victory had wide implications for the industry , and the fight made
Ford a popular hero.
64. Raymond Kurzweil, The Age of Spiritual Machines : When Computers
Exceed Human Intelligence, Penguin, 2000.
65. T.N. Narasimhan is Professor Emeritus in the College of Engineering,
and in the College of Natural Resources, University of California at
Berkeley , USA. He has quoted her from Aspirations and an Earth
Forgotten , In: The Hindu , May 16, 2007.
66. Address at the 25th convocation of Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher
Learning, Puttaparthi, Andhra Pradesh, on 22 November 2006.
67. Khwaja Muinuddin Chishti, R.A. was born in Sajistan, East Persia in
1138. In compliance with a spiritual command, he left Medina for India
passing through Isfahan, Bokhara and Lahore. He arrived at the barren and
desolate land of Rajputana which was ruled by Prithvi Raj Chauhan. He
settled there by the side of a hill close to Ana Sagar Lake.
68. Holy Quran, Sura Al-Baqara, Verse 2 : 256.
69. Saiyied Athar Abbas Rizvi, History of Sufism in India, Volume 2,
70. Qala rabbi ishrah lee sadr ee. Holy Quran, Sura Ta-Ha; Verse 20 : 25.
71. Arberry , Arthur John (T ranslator), Discourses of Rumi, John Murray ,
1961, pp. 89-90. Arberry (1905-1969) was a respected scholar of Arabic,
Persian and Islamic studies. He was Head of the Department of Classics at
Cairo University in Egypt and, later , Sir Thomas Adams, Professor of
Arabic at Cambridge University from 1947 until his death in 1969. His
translation of the Quran is widely held to be the best written by any non-
72. Arberry , Arthur John, Legacy of Persia, Oxford University Press, 1953.
Persia is the western name for the Iranian plateau. The Persians assumed
different identities over the years. The Azeris live in the north-western
corner; the Kurds along the border to Turkey and Iran; the Lur live in
central western Iran; south of the Lur live the Bakhtiari; the Persians live in
the central and southern Iran; the Baloch live in south-eastern Iran, as well
as in south-western Pakistan; the Pathans live in southern Afghanistan; the
Tadchiks live in northern Afghanistan. The Uzbeks, the Turcomans and the
Kygyzians live in north-eastern Afghanistan. The Parsis mostly living in
western India are descended from Persian Zoroastrian immigrants to the
73. Johnson, Robert A., Owning Y our Own Shadow: Understanding the
Dark Side of the Psyche, Harper , San Francisco; Reprint edition, 1993.
74. Barackman, Floyd H., Practical Christian Theology: Examining the
Great Doctrines of the Faith, Kregel Publications, 2001.
75. Dan Sperber , Explaining Cultur e : A Naturalistic Appr oach, Blackwell
Publishers, 1996. Dan Sperber is a French social and cognitive scientist. He
called culture "epidemiology of representations".
76. Johnson, Robert A., Inner W ork: Using Dr eams and Cr eative
Imagination for Personal Gr owth and Integration, Harper , San Francisco;
New edition, 1989. Robert Johnson is a gifted psychologist in the Jungian
tradition. He studied at Sri Aurobindo Ashram in India. "I place my hope in
individuals, not in the great collective swings. Nothing will see us through
the age we're entering but high consciousness," he said.
77. Michael Balint, The Doctor , His Patient and the Illness, Elsevier Health
Sciences, 2000. Michael Balint (1890-1970) was a psychoanalyst from
Hungary , who emigrated to Britain in the 1930s. He worked to help develop
a better understanding of the emotional content of the doctor -patient
relationship. The Balint method consists of regular case discussion in small
groups under the guidance of a qualified group leader . The work of the
group involves both training and research.
78. Tagore, Rabindranath, Ideals of Education, The V isva-Bharati Quarterly
79. Tagore, Rabindranath, Personality . London : Macmillan & Co., 1917,
80. Tagore Rabindranath, Gitanjali, Branden Books, 1979. Gitanjali (Bangla
Gitanjoli) is a collection of 103 English poems, lar gely translations. While
half the poems (52) in the English text were selected from the original
Bengali volume published in 1910, others were taken from Noibeddo
(1901), Khea (1906) and a handful from other works. A slender volume was
published in 1913 with an exhilarating preface by WB Yeats. Rabindranath
became the first non-European to win the Nobel Prize for literature.
81. Convocation address Banaras Hindu University (BHU), Varanasi, on 2
March 2006. It was founded by Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya in 1916. It is
a major Indian university located in Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh. It is reckoned
as the lar gest residential university in Asia with a 1300 acre (5.5 sq. km)
campus. The total enrolment in the University stands at just over 15,000.
82. Laing, David Laing, Self and Others, Penguin Books, 1990. He wrote
extensively on mental illness and particularly the experience of psychosis.
According to Laing, the strange behaviour and seemingly confused speech
of people under going a psychotic episode were ultimately understandable as
an attempt to communicate worries and concerns, often in situations where
this was not possible or not permitted. Laing stressed the role of society ,
and particularly the family , in the development of madness.
83. These lines are from the poem Fields composed by Marco Mahler .
These are taken from www . learnenglish.or g.uk.
84. Nuclear Physicist, Shirley Ann Jackson, has been the 18th President of
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York, USA. She served as
Chairman of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) from 1995-
99. She spearheaded the formation of the International Nuclear Regulators
Association (INRA) in May 1997.
85. Amartya Sen, Martha Nussbaum, The Quality of Life, Oxford University
Press, 1993. "The concept of quality of life replaces incomes and utilities
by the capability and human flourishing. The focus is kept on capability-
building and not on indicators like per capita income."
86. Brenna Lorenz comes from State College, Pennsylvania, United States.
These lines are from the website www .heptune.com that contains Science-
87. Convocation address National Academy of Legal Studies and Research
University , Hyderabad, on 3 October 2003.
88. Surat Spiritual Declaration was signed on October 15, 2003, by Sri
Balgangadharanatha Swamiji, Dr . Homi B. Dhalla, Bishop Dr . Thomas
Dabre, Yuvacharya Mahashraman, Sadhvi Pramukha Kanakprabha,
Jagadguru Sri Sri Sivaratri Desikendra Mahaswami ji, Rev . Stanislaus
Fernandes, Swami Jitatmananda, Rev . Syed Muhammad Jilani Ashraf, Rev .
Ezeikal Isaac Malekar , Prince Huzaifa Mohyiuddin, Brahma Kumari
Sudesh Didi, Dr . Jaswant Singh Neki, Ven. Rahul Bodhi and by Maulana
Wahiduddin Khan. It is available at the website of Jain Vishva Bharati
Institute, Ladnun. www .herenow4u.de.
89. Geor ge F. Saint-Laurent, Spirituality and W orld Religions : A
Comparative Intr oduction, McGraw-Hill, 1999.
90. Burkhardt, Mar garet A, and mary Gail Nagai-Jacobson, Sprituality:
Living Our Connectedness, Thomson Delmar Learning, 2001.
91. Richard Potter , Authentic Spirituality , Llewellyn Worldwide, 2004.
Richard Potter experienced a wide cross-section of people and society . He
worked for over 20 years with juvenile of fenders and children in need of
92. Jalal Al-Din Rumi (Original in Persian), Coleman Barks (T ranslator),
93. Stephen Hetherington, Good Knowledge, Bad Knowledge, Oxford
University Press, 2002. According to Stephen Hetherington, knowledge of a
fact can be better or worse and in this way knowledge is never absolute. He
argued in favour of non-absolutist way of conceiving of knowledge.
94. Daniel Patrick Liston, Teaching, Learning and Loving: Reclaiming
Passion in Educational Practice, Routledge (UK), 2003.
95. Paul Williams, Buddhism, Routledge (UK), 2005. Bell Hooks, Teaching
Community , Routledge (UK), 2003. Paul Williams is Professor of Indian
religions at Bristol University and a leading scholar of Buddhism. He re-
expressed Buddhism in Western language, symbols and archetypes.
96. Victoria Gill, The Eleven Commandments of Good T eaching, Corwin
97. Turner , Edwin Arthur , The Essentials of Good T eaching, D.C. Heath &
98. Toothman, Nelda C., The T eacher W ithin, Trafford Publishing, 2002.
99. David Har greaves, Creative Pr ofessionalism: The Role of Teachers in
the Knowledge Society , Demos, 1998. Professor David Har greaves is
Fellow of Wolfson College, Cambridge, UK. "If we are serious about
creating an educational transformation in this country , then we all have to
play a part in moving towards a high trust, innovative culture in which
100. Dorothy Walters, Marr ow of Flame: Poems of the Spiritual Journey ,
This book germinated during my travels with Dr . Kalam to various centres
of learning ranging from panchayat schools in heartland of India to world-
renowned universities. I thank the members of Dr . Kalam' s team,
particularly , R. Swaminathan, H. Sheridon and R.K. Prasad. I was very well-
looked after during all my tours with Dr . Kalam.
I received utmost support and encouragement from B. Soma Raju,
Chairman of Care Hospitals and P . Krishnam Raju, Chairman of Care
Foundation to devote my time and attention in working on this book.
Sangma M.B., my pupil, assisted me in editing out the book and adding a
fresh flavour to this book. I appreciate Namita for the cover design of this
I am thankful to my friends, notably , Rajiv Sangal, Director , International
Institute of Information Technology , Hyderabad; Kasu Prasad Reddy , Chief
of Maxivision Eye Hospital, Hyderabad; Priyesh Tiwari, Care Hospital,
Hyderabad; S.G. Prasad, Care Foundation, Hyderabad; Dennis Marcus
Mathew , The Hindu , now based at Alleppey , Kerala; and S.A. Taimiya,
Frontline Publications, Hyderabad. They all have given me their valuable
My family - Anjana, Aseem and Amol - were co- operative and considerate
as always. I feel proud of myself when I see my sons blossom in their
respective careers in the IT Industry . They have shared thoughts and value-
added concepts at lar ge.
- Arun K. Tiwari

Born on 15 October 1931, at Rameswaram in Tamil Nadu,
specialized in aeronautical engineering from
Madras Institute of Technology. Dr Kalam is one of the most distinguished
scientists of India and has received honorary doctorates from forty-five
universities and institutions in India and abroad. He has been awarded the Padma
Bhushan (1981), the Padma Vibhushan (1990) and India's highest civilian award,
the Bharat Ratna (1997). He has also received the King Charles II medal (2007),
the Woodrow Wilson Award (2008), the Hoover Award (2008) and the
International Von Karman Wings Award (2009) among other international
Dr Kalam became the eleventh President of India on 25 July 2002. His focus and
greatest ambition remains finding ways to transform India into a developed

Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd 2013
7/16, Ansari Road, Daryaganj New Delhi 110002

Allahabad Bengaluru Chennai Hyderabad Jaipur Kathmandu Kolkata Mumbai

Text copyright A.P.J. Abdul Kalam 2013
Illustrations copyright Rupa Publications India Pvt. Ltd 2013

No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, or stored in a
retrieval system, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

The moral right of the author has been asserted.

Printed at Thomson Press India Ltd
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or
otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated, without the
publisher's prior consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in
which it is published.

To the sixteen million youth who I have met and
interacted with in the last two decades

My Father's Morning Walk
A Working Boy at Eight
Three Great Hearts Resolve a Problem
My Mother and My Sister
My First Mentor: Ahmed Jalalluddin
A Brush with Fire
My Mentor: Dr Vikram Sarabhai
A Life in Science

recounts certain unique experiences of my life from my childhood
until now, when I am over eighty years old. In all these years and through all
these experiences, the most important lesson I have learnt is, one must keep
dreaming at various phases of life, and then work hard to realize those dreams. If
we do so, then success is imminent. To the many people I meet I always say,
'Dreams are not those that we see in our sleep; they should be the ones that never
The idea for this book came to me one day while I was walking in my
garden. Like every other time, I stood under the grand Arjuna tree which is
nearly a hundred years old in age, and I looked up into its branches to see if any
new nests had been built by birds or if a fresh beehive had appeared. And
something in that moment, as I gazed up at this tree, in this city of Delhi,
reminded me intensely of my father. He, too, was an early riser whose first few
hours of the day would be spent with nature, examining his coconut trees,
walking the roads of the town we lived in. I recalled with a smile and a feeling of
happiness my childhood, the people who inhabited it, the hands I held while I
traversed it. I then also began to think of the journey that my life has been - the
unusual paths I have travelled, the things I have seen, the events I have been a
part of. And I began to wonder if these memories and experiences should stay
with me or if I must share them with my numerous readers and family members
whose numbers have grown as large as the abundant roots of an enormous
banyan tree - its great-great-grandchildren!
I have written a few books till date, and in some of them I have described my
childhood experiences. When I wrote my first book about my life, I had
wondered how it would interest anyone. Unlike in my previous books,
focuses more on the smaller, lesser-known happenings in my life. The
incidents around my mother and father were written because even now, at the
age of eighty-two, I still cherish the values and ethics that they lovingly
inculcated in me. The qualities they instilled in me, and which I learnt from
observing them and by understanding their reactions to the adversities they
faced, have helped me live better, and through these values my parents still live
strongly within me. When my father talked about the importance of
understanding people's minds, or faced difficulties stoically, I remembered his
words years later when I was battling various odds myself. In my mother's tender
touch and sensitive upbringing of her children I found a world of love and
kindness. I also felt compelled to record in detail the contributions of my sister
Zohra and her generosity; the openness of the outlook of my first mentor Ahmed
Jalalluddin that first encouraged me to think of studying further. Instances such
as my failure to qualify for the Indian Air Force and the other adversities I have
been witness to, have all brought home to me the necessity of setbacks in one's
life. Yes, they seem insurmountable at the time, but there really is no difficulty
one cannot overcome if there is determination in the heart.
Recently, I was talking to my friend Professor Arun Tiwari, when he
suddenly asked me an unusual question, 'Kalam saheb, can you sum up your life
so far, in one sentence?'
It made me think for a while. Eventually I said, 'Arun, my life can be
summed up in these phrases and words: love poured to the child struggle
more struggle bitter tears then sweet tears and finally a life as beautiful
and fulfilling as seeing the birth of the full moon.'
I hope these stories will help all my readers understand their dreams and
compel them to work on those dreams that keep them awake.
or as far back as I can remember, my father Jainulabdeen's day began at 4
a.m. He would be up before anyone else in the household. After saying his
prayers in the breaking light of the day, he would go on a long walk to visit his
coconut grove. We lived in Rameswaram, a small temple town on an island in
Tamil Nadu. This being on the east coast of India, dawn would break early, and
our day's schedule followed the rhythm of the rising and setting of the sun and
The sound of the sea was a constant presence in our lives. Storms and
cyclones blew by with regularity during the tumultuous monsoon months. We
lived in our ancestral home, a fairly large house made of limestone and brick,
built some time in the nineteenth century. It was never luxurious, but was filled
with love. My father had a boat-building business. Additionally, we also owned
a small coconut grove some four miles away from our house. That was where
my father would be headed for in the early morning hours. His walking circuit
was well established and he rarely deviated from it. First he would step out into
Mosque Street, where our house was located. It was a small, predominantly
Muslim locality not too far from the Shiva temple that has made our town
famous for centuries. He would then walk through the narrow lanes of the town,
on to the more open roads leading to the coconut groves, and finally wind his
way through the groves to his patch of land.
Today I try to imagine him walking on those quiet roads, long before the day
made its many demands on him. Ours was a large family and I am sure there
were many pressures on him to see to our needs. But at that hour, I think of him
listening intently to the sea, to the ever-present ravens and other birds that
swooped and flew all around, woken up by the rising sun like him. Perhaps he
said his prayers to himself as he walked, or thought of his family with a calm,
uncluttered early morning mind. I never did ask him what went through his mind
on this long daily walk - for when does a young boy really have the time to
reflect in this way about his father? But I was always sure that the morning walk
added something to his personality, an element of calm that was apparent even to
My father was not a person with much formal education; neither did he ever
acquire much wealth in his long lifetime. Yet, he was one of the wisest, truly
generous men I have had the fortune of knowing. Our mosque was the focal
point of the locality, and my father was the man everyone turned to in their hour
of need. They believed that he was truly connected to God. I remember going to
the mosque to say my prayers with him. He made sure we never missed any of
our prayers and neither did it enter our minds to shirk this duty. After saying our
namaz, when we would step out on to the road, groups of people would
inevitably be there, waiting to talk to him and share their worries with him.
What did these men and women see in him? He was not a preacher, nor a
teacher. He was just a man who lived by his convictions and the tenets of his
religion. What did he give them? I now think that it was his mere presence that
calmed them and gave them hope. He said prayers for them, and many people
would offer him bowls of water. He would dip his fingertips in them and say a
prayer, after which the water would be taken away to be given to the sick. Later,
many of these people would come to the house and thank him for having cured
their near and dear ones.
Why did he do this? And where did he get the peacefulness and generosity of
heart to talk to people, comfort them and pray for them, in the midst of the
busyness of his own life? He was a humble boat owner. Life was certainly not
easy for him, what with finding the best ways to make ends meet in a tiny temple
town cut off from the mainland. Yet, never once did I see my father turn away
anyone who wanted to unburden himself by talking to him.
Without doubt, he was a deeply spiritual man with some kind of connection
with God. I believe his spirituality came from being a learned man. He knew the
scriptures and could bring out their essential truth to even the youngest enquiring
mind. When I asked him questions, he would always reply and attempt to
explain in simple, straightforward Tamil. Once I asked him, 'Why do these
people come to you? And what do you really do for them?' His reply still stays
with me, nearly five decades later.
'Whenever human beings find themselves alone, as a natural reaction, they
start looking for company. Whenever they are in trouble, they look for someone
to help them Every recurrent anguish, longing and desire finds it own special
helper. For the people who come to me in distress, I am but a go-between in their
effort to ward off demonic forces with prayers and offerings.'
Then he went on to tell me something about prayers and its power over man
that still resonates, despite my years in the field of scientific research. He said to
look for help outside is never the final answer. 'One must understand the
difference between a fear-ridden vision of destiny and the vision that enables us
to seek the enemy of fulfillment within ourselves When troubles come, try to
understand the relevance of your sufferings. Adversity always presents
His advice meant that in the many setbacks and defeats that destiny has
handed me, I have always been able to look within for strength. I travelled far,
far away from life in Rameswaram. My journey took me to places I had never
imagined visiting - from the cockpit of a fighter jet to the highest office in the
nation. Yet, it was always his words that came back to me.
'There is a divine power that looks over us, that gently lifts us from our
sadness and failures and miseries. If we open our minds and let it, it will guide
us to our true place. Release yourself from the bindings that limit you and let that
power overtake your mind, and that's when you will be on the road to true
happiness and peace.' This is what I imagine him saying to me whenever I am
I am now eighty-two years of age. Like him, my day, even today, begins with
a walk. Every morning I savour the sight of the new sun, the benign light in the
sky before the sun appears, the cool breeze and the sweet call of the birds. I
understand how this short time of the day binds us to nature. Each morning is
different in the way the elements come together for that day. It is a little drama
nature puts up only for us, and I can't stop marvelling at it. Unlike him, I often
find myself in different cities and towns in the mornings because of my travels,
but the early morning peace and calm is the same everywhere. Wherever I am, I
can find a tree that is great with age, where birds dwell and go busily about their
day with the new dawn, whose leaves wave gently to me in the morning breeze.
It may be a warm day or a bitterly cold misty morning when my breath fogs the
air in front of me, but this time away from the cares and worries that the rest of
the day will invariably bring means so much to me.
At my home in Delhi there is a grand old Arjuna tree. Somehow my feet
always pull me towards it when I walk in my garden. It is usually laden with
honeycombs and is home to hundreds of birds, especially parrots. The dignity,
beauty and stature of this tree brings memories of my father to mind and I even
have silent conversations with it. Once, I wrote this poem, where I imagined
what the tree would say to me if only it could:

Oh my friend Kalam,
I crossed age hundred like your father and mother.
Every day morning, you walk an hour,
I also see you on full moon nights,
Walking with a thinking mood.
I know, my friend, the thoughts in your mind,
'What can I give?'
(The Great Tree in My Home)

As I walk wherever my life has led me, I often think of my father
Jainulabdeen. In my mind's eye I see a simple man, who, even when he was of a
great age, continued to walk every morning to his coconut grove. As I see him, I
imagine how it's been almost an hour since he set off, and the caretaker of the
grove is also up and going about his day. When my father walks into his
plantation, the men hail each other with warmth. Perhaps Jainulabdeen sits down
somewhere awhile. The other man climbs a coconut tree. He chooses half a
dozen coconuts and cuts them down with a swing of his knife. They fall with a
thump to the ground. The man quickly makes his way down. Then he proceeds
to tie them up together into a neat bundle. Now the two men sit companionably
for a while. They discuss the state of the trees. They peer up at the sky, talk
about rains and pests and other matters of the soil. Finally Jainulabdeen picks up
his bundle of coconuts, says goodbye and begins his walk back home. He will
give away a few coconuts to neighbours and others. The rest will find their way
into curries and chutneys prepared by my mother. I still remember sitting down
to those simple meals and enjoying immensely the smooth, creamy coconut
chutney my mother placed on the leaf plate. It is a taste that has lingered in my
mouth even years later, made sweeter still knowing that it contained the love of
my parents and their honest hard work.
iving on the island of Rameswaram while I was growing up, the sea was an
important part of our lives. Its tides, the lapping of the waves, the sound of
trains passing on the Pamban Bridge, the birds that always circled the town and
the salt in the air are sights and sounds that will always remain linked with my
memories of childhood. Apart from its sheer presence around us, the sea was
also a source of livelihood for our neighbours and us. Almost every household
had some connection with the sea, whether as fishermen or as boat owners.
My father, too, operated a ferry that took people back and forth between the
islands of Rameswaram and Dhanushkodi, which is about twenty-two kilometres
away. I still remember the time when he got the idea for this, and how we built
Rameswaram has, since antiquity, been an important pilgrimage destination.
Rama is believed to have stopped here and built the bridge to Lanka when he
was on his way to rescue Sita. The temple of Rameswaram is dedicated to Shiva,
and houses a lingam fashioned by Sita herself. Some versions of the Ramayana
say that Rama, Lakshmana and Sita stopped here to pray to Shiva on their way
back to Ayodhya from Lanka.
People visiting our town would go to Dhanushkodi as part of their
pilgrimage. A bath at Sagara-Sangam here is considered sacred. The sangam is
the meeting place of the Bay of Bengal and the Indian Ocean. Dhanushkodi is
now connected by road and vans take pilgrims there, but way back when I was a
child, a ferry was also a good way of reaching the island.
My father, looking to supplement his not very substantial income, decided to
start a ferry business. He started building the boat that we needed for this
himself, on the seashore.
Watching the boat come to life from pieces of wood and metal was perhaps
my first introduction to the world of engineering. Wood was procured and
Ahmed Jalalluddin, a cousin, arrived to help my father out. Every day, I would
wait impatiently till I could go to the place where the boat was taking shape.
Long pieces of wood were cut into the required shape, dried, smoothened and
then joined together. Wood fires seasoned the wood that made up the hull and the
bulkheads. Slowly the bottom, then the sides and the hull began to form in front
of our eyes. Many years later, in my work, I would learn how to make rockets
and missiles. Complex mathematics and scientific research would be the bedrock
of those engineering marvels. But that boat coming up on a seashore, which
would take pilgrims and fishermen back and forth who is to say it was not as
important or momentous in our lives then?
The building of the boat was an important influence for me in another way. It
brought Ahmed Jalalluddin into my life. He was much older than me, yet we
struck up a friendship. He recognized the inherent desire within me to learn and
question, and was always there to lend a patient ear and give words of advice.
He could read and write English, and spoke to me about scientists and
inventions, literature and medicine. Walking with him in the streets of
Rameswaram, or by the seaside, or by our boat as it took shape, my mind began
to form ideas and ambitions.
The boat business was a great success. My father employed some men to
operate it, and groups of pilgrims would use the service to reach Dhanushkodi.
There were days when I would slip in among the crowd and sit with the crew as
they steered the boat to and from Rameswaram. I heard the story of Rama and
how he built the bridge to Lanka with the help of his army of monkeys; how he
brought back Sita and stopped at Rameswaram again, so that they could perform
penance for having killed Ravana; how Hanuman was told to bring back a large
lingam from far up north, but when he took too long, Sita would not wait and
fashioned a lingam with her own hands to worship Shiva. These stories and
many others washed around me in different tongues and shapes, as people from
all over India used our ferry service. A little boy among so many was always
welcome and there would be someone or the other willing to talk to me, share
the story of his life and his reasons for making the pilgrimage.
And so the years went by. My school, teachers, Ahmed Jalalluddin and
others taught me so many things. But the boat and the people who sailed in it
were no less important. In this way, among the waves and the sands, laughter
and stories, the days flew by. Then one day, disaster struck.
The Bay of Bengal is hit frequently by cyclones. The months of November
and May in particular are dangerous in this regard. I still remember the night of
that terrible cyclone vividly. The wind had picked up speed for days, till it
became a howling gale. It screamed and whistled in our ears and pulled and
hacked at the trees or anything that stood in its way. Soon torrential rain started.
We had retreated into our houses much earlier. There was no electricity in those
days, and the lamps barely managed to stay alive. In that flickering darkness,
with the wind working itself into a frenzy, the sound of the rain lashing down
outside, we huddled together and waited for the night to pass. My thoughts
travelled again and again to the open seas. Was anyone trapped there? What was
it like to be in a storm such as this without your mother's comforting presence
The next morning, after the storm died down, we saw the unbelievable
destruction that had been wrought all around us. Trees, houses, plantations were
uprooted and devastated. The roads had disappeared under water and debris
flown in by winds that had come in at speeds of over 100 miles an hour. But the
worst news of all was the one that hit us like a punch to the stomach. Our boat
had been washed away. Now when I think of that day, I realize that perhaps my
father had known this would happen the night before, while we waited for the
storm to pass. In his life he had already witnessed so many storms and cyclones.
This was just one of them. Yet, he had tried to calm us children down and had
made sure we went to sleep without infecting us with his worries. In the light of
the morning, seeing his drawn face and the worries lining his eyes, I tried to
gather my thoughts. In my mind I mourned our lost ferry boat fiercely. It felt as
though something I had made with my own hands had been gathered up and
Yet, my father's stoicism is what saw us through this crisis too. In time
another boat came, and business resumed. Pilgrims and tourists returned. The
temple and the mosque filled with worshippers and the markets bustled with men
and women, buying and selling once more.
Cyclones and storms struck us again and again. I even learnt to sleep through
them. Many years later, in 1964, when I was no longer living in Rameswaram, a
massive cyclone struck. This time, it carried away a part of the landmass of
Dhanushkodi. A train that was on Pamban Bridge at the time was washed away,
with many pilgrims inside. It altered the geography of the area, and Dhanushkodi
became a ghost town, never really recovering its former character. Even today,
remnants of buildings stand there as monuments to the 1964 cyclone.
My father lost his ferry boat once more in that storm. He had to rebuild his
business yet again. I could not do much to help him practically, for I was far
removed from that world. But when I struggled to give shape to the Satellite
Launch Vehicle (SLV) rocket, or the Prithvi and Agni missiles, when
countdowns and take-offs were disrupted, and our rocket launch sites situated by
the Bay of Bengal in Thumba and Chandipur were rained upon, I always
remembered the look on my father's face the day after the storm. It was an
acknowledgement of the power of nature, of knowing what it means to live by
the sea and make your living from it. Of knowing that there is a larger energy
and force that can crush our ambitions and plans in the blink of an eye, and that
the only way to survive is to face your troubles and rebuild your life.
very morning a large pile of newspapers, both in English and Tamil, is
delivered to me. During my travels abroad I like to stay in touch with news
from India, which I do by going online to read news articles and editorials in
different magazines and papers. The wealth of information now available at the
click of a finger amazes me. As a person closely involved with engineering and
science, the march of technology should not surprise me, but when I juxtapose
our lives today with what it was like seventy years ago, in a small south Indian
town, the difference is startling even for me.
I was born in the year 1931. When I was about eight, World War II broke
out. Britain declared war on Nazi Germany, and despite the Indian Congress's
opposition, India too, as a British colony, was involved in the war. India's war
effort saw a record number of Indian soldiers being deployed in various
warzones around the world. Daily life, however, remained fairly unaffected
initially, particularly for us in the southern tip of the country.
As I have mentioned, Rameswaram in the 1940s was a sleepy little town that
came alive with the arrival of pilgrims. The inhabitants were mostly tradespeople
or small businessmen. The town was dominated by the temple, though there was
a mosque and a church too. The inhabitants went about their way fairly
peacefully, and other than the normal altercations that break out in any town or
village, nothing much of importance happened.
The only source of information about the outside world was the newspaper.
The agency that distributed newspapers was run by my cousin Samsuddin.
Along with Jalalluddin, he was a big influence in my early life. Though he could
read and write, Samsuddin was not well travelled nor highly educated. Yet he
had such affection for me and encouraged me in so many ways, that he became a
guiding light for me. These men understood my deepest thoughts and feelings
before I could articulate them. To me they were adults who could reach out
beyond the narrow confines of their daily lives and businesses and see the larger
Samsuddin's newspaper distribution agency was the only one in
Rameswaram. There were about a thousand literate people in the town, and he
delivered newspapers to all of them. The papers carried news about the
Independence Movement that was heading towards a crescendo at the time.
These news items would be read and discussed with great gusto among
everyone. There would also be news from the war front, about Hitler and the
Nazi army. Of course, there were many mundane matters too, like astrological
references or bullion rates, which were consulted with utmost interest. The Tamil

was the most popular of all these papers.
The way the papers reached Rameswaram was quite unique. They came by
morning train and were kept at Rameswaram station. From there they had to be
collected and sent to all the subscribers. This was Samsuddin's business and he
managed it effortlessly. However, as World War II raged, we no longer remained
isolated from the world, and it affected my life and the newspaper delivery
business in a strange new way.
The British government had placed a number of sanctions and rations on
goods. Something like a state of emergency now prevailed in the country. Our
large family felt the difficulties acutely. Food, clothes, the needs of the babies of
the household, all became difficult to procure and provide for. In our family
there were five sons and daughters, as well as my father's brothers' families. My
grandmother and mother had to stretch every resource to the utmost to keep
everyone fed, clothed and in good health.
As the difficulties of the war started affecting us, Samsuddin came up with a
proposal that excited and delighted me tremendously. One fallout of the
conditions was that the rail stop at Rameswaram station had been done away
with. What would happen to our papers then? How were they to be collected and
then distributed to all the people of the town who were looking forward to their
daily dose of news? Samsuddin found a way out. The papers would be kept
ready in large bundles. As the train chugged down the Rameswaram-
Dhanushkodi track, they would be flung out on to the platform. And that is
where I came in. Samsuddin offered me the enjoyable job of catching these
bundles of papers being thrown from the moving train and then taking them
around town for distribution!
My enthusiasm knew no bounds. I was only eight, but I was going to
contribute in a meaningful way to the household income! For many days I had
noticed the amount of food on my mother's and grandmother's plates becoming
lesser and lesser as they divided the portions between all of us. The children
were always fed first and I don't remember any of us ever going hungry.
Obviously, the women were compromising on their nutrition for us. I agreed to
Samsuddin's offer with alacrity.
However, my new job had to be fitted into my regular routine. My studies
and school had to continue as before, and the delivery business had to be
accommodated amidst all these other activities. Among my siblings and cousins,
I had shown an early aptitude for mathematics. My father had arranged for me to
take tuitions from our mathematics teacher. However, my teacher had a
condition that I, along with the four other students whom he had accepted,
needed to reach his home at dawn after having taken a bath. So for a year, which
was the duration of the tuition, I started my day while it was still dark outside,
with my mother shaking me awake. She herself would have risen before me and
got my bath ready. She would then help me bathe and send me on my way to my
teacher's home. There I would study for an hour and return by 5 a.m. By then my
father would be ready to take me to the Arabic School nearby, where I learnt the
After my lesson on the Koran Sharif was over, I would sprint away to the
railway station. There I would wait, hopping from one leg to the other, eyes and
ears keenly open for signs of the oncoming train. Surprisingly, unlike most trains
these days, the Madras-Dhanushkodi Mail was rarely delayed! Soon, the engine
smoke would be visible in the distance. The horn would be tooted loudly and
with a thunderous roar, the train would pass through the station. I had worked
out the best spot from which to keep an eye out for the flying newspaper
bundles. Like clockwork, they would be tossed out on to the platform. The train
would then huff and puff away, Samsuddin's person in the train would wave out
to me and as the train receded, its whistle growing faint, my job would begin.
I then picked up the bundles, divided them up into batches according to the
neighbourhoods in which the papers had to be distributed and off I went. For
about an hour I tore around Rameswaram, delivering the papers to everyone.
Soon I began to identify people by the papers they read. Many would be waiting
for me, and there would be always be a friendly word or two. Some would tell
me to hurry back home so I would not be late for school! I think most enjoyed
being handed their papers by a cheerful eight year old.
Our town being on the east coast, by the time the work was over at 8 a.m.,
the sun would be high up in the sky. Now I headed back home, where my mother
waited with breakfast. A simple meal would be served, but how hungry I was
usually! My mother made sure I ate every morsel before sending me off to
school. But my work did not end there.
In the evening, after school was over, I would do the rounds of Samsuddin's
customers again, collecting dues. Then I would meet him, so he could work out
the accounts of the day.
At that time, sitting somewhere near the sea, with the breeze blowing in,
Jalalluddin or Samsuddin would finally open up the day's paper. All of us would
pore over the black type of the

One of them would read aloud the
news items, and slowly the larger outside world would enter our consciousness.
Gandhi, Congress, Hitler, Periyar E.V. Ramasamy, their words and exhortations
would hang in the evening air. I would trace the photos and words with my
fingers, wondering what it must be like to be out there in the larger world with
all of them. Maybe, I thought to myself, one day I would go to the big cities like
Madras, Bombay and Calcutta. What would I say if I ever got to meet people
like Gandhi and Nehru? But such thoughts were soon interrupted by the calls of
my playmates, and then for dinner. There was homework to be done, and even
an eight year old has only that much energy to spend. By 9 p.m. I would be fast
asleep, as the next day more studies and the life of a working man lay in store.
This routine continued for about a year. In that one year of running around
with the papers, I grew taller and browner. I also learnt that I could now judge
quite accurately the distances I could cover at a sprint with a bundle of papers in
my hand, and hence could time my arrival at various localities at the same time
every day. I could calculate in my head the amount owed to Samsuddin by each
of his subscribers, and could reel off the names of those who had not paid up that
day. Mostly, I learnt that to be a working man meant you had to be up and ready
to face the day, whatever else may happen to you. Homework, tuition, prayers,
all carried on, but the Madras-Dhanushkodi Mail would not wait for me - I had
to be present at the station at the correct time and at the correct point to catch the
bundles as they came flying in. It was my first brush with taking up a
responsibility and seeing to it that I kept my word to my cousin Samsuddin, no
matter what. It was also a most enjoyable time and I loved every moment of it,
notwithstanding the intense tiredness every night. My mother often fretted at my
taking up this additional work and the toll it was taking on me, but I shook my
head and smiled at her. Knowing that my earnings were somehow helping us all,
and that she was secretly proud of me for having taken on the role of a working
man at the age of eight, kept me going with a smile on my face.
y childhood town of Rameswaram is a small island. Its highest spot is the
top of a hill called Gandamadana Parvatham. Standing there, you could see
the whole of Rameswaram stretched out around you - lush green coconut palms
swaying everywhere, the sea in the distance and the looming gopuram of the
Ramanathaswamy Temple presiding over the skyline. It was a quiet town then.
The people made their living from either fishing or coconut farming, and from
the tourism that occurred due to the presence of the temple. Rameswaram is one
of the holiest pilgrimage spots for many Indians, and the town was almost
always full of pilgrims and tourists.
The small local population consisted of mostly Hindu households, with a
sprinkling of Muslims like us, and Christians too. Each community lived in
healthy contentment next to the other. The divisions and vicissitudes of the
outside world rarely made their way here. The daily papers brought news of
upheavals and communal fault lines being drawn elsewhere, but here, life
continued at its age-old leisurely pace.
This quiet harmony had been in place for generations. My father loved to tell
us the story of our great-great-grandfather, who once saved the idol of the
Ramanathaswamy Temple. The story went that on a certain festival day, the
, or idol, would be taken out of the sanctum sanctorum and carried in a
procession around the temple precincts. The temple has a number of tanks
dotting it, and the idol was taken around the periphery of these tanks too. During
one such procession, in a sequence of events no one remembers clearly any
fell into the tank. What a calamity that was! People stood
rooted in horror, imagining the wrath of the gods falling upon them very soon.
One person, however, did not lose his presence of mind - my great-great-
grandfather. He leapt into the tank and retrieved the idol in no time. The
gratitude of the priests and other temple officials was overwhelming. Yes, he was
a Muslim. And yes, caste and religious purists would be horrified at the most
sacred element of the temple being handled by someone not authorized to do so,
but none of these feelings were articulated. Instead, my great-great-grandfather
was treated like a hero. The temple also made a proclamation that from now on,
at the festival, the temple would give
to him. This was a rare
honour for anyone, let alone for someone from a different religion. It meant that
on each such festival day, the temple would first honour, or give

my great-great-grandfather. This tradition went on for years and years and the

would be given to my father too.
This sense of harmony continued into later years. Like I have mentioned in
another chapter, my father had a ferry business in which pilgrims were taken to
Dhanushkodi. Our ferry service was used by the temple too.
My father was the imam of the Rameswaram mosque. He was a deeply
devout man with complete and utter faith in the Koran. He inculcated all the
habits of a good Muslim in his children and indeed in his entire family. For the
people of the town, he was a philosopher and guide - someone they could turn to
with their problems, whether spiritual or otherwise.
One of his closest friends was the priest of the Ramanathaswamy Temple,
Pakshi Lakshmana Sastry. Sastrygal was not only the priest but also a very
learned man, well versed in Vedic knowledge. I still remember his visage
perfectly. He was always dressed in the traditional attire of a temple priest, in his
dhoti and angavastram. On his head he sported the mandatory tuft of the
. He was one of the kindest, most gentle men I knew.
There was a third person who was as important in the spiritual life of our
little community and that was Father Bodal, the priest of the lone church in the
town. He was as involved in the welfare of the churchgoers of Rameswaram as
my father and Sastrygal, and as concerned about the need for harmony and peace
The memory of these three learned men is still etched in my mind. I can still
see them - one in his turban and imam's cloak, another in his dhoti and the third
in his cassock. They met every Friday evening, at around four-thirty, and
discussed matters of religion and the happenings of the town. Sometimes people
came to visit them at that time with specific issues to be resolved, or the three
men kept each other apprised of anything that could potentially threaten the
peace among the people and together, they tried to work out ways of clearing
miscommunication or scotching rumours before they assumed dangerous
proportions. The fundamental requirement for peace - effective communication
among sections of the people - was always kept alive by these three patriarchs.
Their discussions ranged over a number of topics - the Freedom Movement that
was taking the country in an entirely new direction, the attitude of the British
government to the calls of the nationalists and how all this affected us,
concerned them deeply. They quietly soothed the society around them, making it
a harmonious whole where everyone could have an opportunity to speak freely
One incident from my childhood brought this reality close to my life. I was
then about eight years old, and studying in the third standard. My best friends
were Ramanadha Sastry, Aravindan and Sivaprakasan. All of them were
Brahmins, and Ramanadhan, in fact, was Pakshi Lakshmana Sastry's son. We led
the usual life of schoolboys, spending most of the day together in the classroom
and outside. Like all good friends, our day was incomplete if, at any time, one of
us was absent and we could not share with each other the minute details of all
that is important for boys of that age. In the classroom, we sat near one another
and Ramanadhan and I shared the same bench.
Before I proceed with the main story, I would like to sketch a portrait of my
school, which holds such beautiful memories of days of innocence and mischief
and learning for me. It was called the Rameswaram Panchayat Primary School
and I attended it from 1936 to 1944. It was situated near the seashore, and was
not the most sturdy building certainly! Parts of it were built with bricks but the
roof was thatched. But it was the only school in Rameswaram in those days and
all the children of the town studied there. We were 400 boys and girls in total.
Yes, this school had an unimpressive building and scanty amenities but it was an
interesting place nonetheless. The teachers, particularly those who taught history,
geography and science, were loved by the students. Why? Because they loved
teaching and ensured that each one of us excelled in our studies. To give equal
attention to the fifty-five children in each class could not have been an easy task.
They did not want us to only earn good marks in our exams, they also wanted us
to develop a love for the subjects they taught us. We saw the light of purity
shining in our teachers.
Even if one student was absent for a day, they would go to the parents and
enquire about the child's welfare and the reason for his not coming to school. If
one of us got high marks, the teacher would be the first person to go to our
homes and share the information with our parents. My school was a happy place.
All of us who started our schooling there completed our studies till the eighth
standard. I don't remember even a single person dropping out. These days, when
I visit schools, both big and small, all across the country, I tell them that true
quality does not come from a great building or great facilities or great
advertisements. It happens when education is imparted with love by great
To return to my story, schools of that time, particularly small ones like mine,
did not have uniforms. We were free to wear any traditional items required by
our religion. My friend Ramanadhan sported a tuft, or
, like his father.
(Later, when he grew up, he too became the priest of the temple after his father.)
I went to school wearing my little woven skullcap, like all Muslim boys of the
town. Not once had any of us either noticed or remarked upon this.
When we were in the third standard, there was a great excitement in our lives
- we had a new teacher at school. In a small self-contained community, this was
a matter of much excitement and discussion. We students were agog with
anticipation to know what our new teacher would be like. Would he be strict or
lenient? Quick-tempered or patient? We could not wait for him to start teaching
us. And the first day he came to the classroom, all our eagerness spilled forth.
The teacher was also a Hindu, a Brahmin. As soon as he entered the
classroom, he cast a quick appraising eye over us all, perhaps taking in the
diverse attire of this bunch of boys. Today, I think he must have missed noticing
the bright eyes and eager smiles of the children - strangely, those are the first
things that strike me when confronted by a roomful of children! But our new
teacher was quick to get down to business. He walked to the front of the class
and the first people his eyes settled on were Ramanadhan and I. We were the star
pupils, always eager to learn and participate, and sat right in front. His eyes
lingered on my cap and on Ramanadhan's tuft. A look of annoyance, even
disbelief, washed over his face. Without giving any reason, he demanded to
know my name. When I told him, I was peremptorily told to gather my things
and move to the back row, for reasons known only to him.
I felt sad, even humiliated. I wondered why this had happened. Ramanadhan
was in tears. I still recall his large eyes awash with tears as I picked up my books
and moved away from him.
But neither of us was ready to let this go unreported. That very day I told my
father about it, and Ramanadhan told his father too. The men were shocked and
dismayed. This went against everything they had worked for! A teacher, who
was supposed to be imparting knowledge and opening up our minds, was instead
doing just the opposite. We had rarely seen these two mild-mannered gentlemen
so agitated. They immediately spoke to one another and confirmed the details of
The next Friday, when dusk was falling, they met as usual. Father Bodal was
present too. The teacher had been summoned, and presented himself. In the
gathering darkness, as day turned into night, my father and Sastrygal told him in
no uncertain terms that the scourge of religious divisions, which was disturbing
India's fabric in other parts of the country, would not be allowed to grow here.
They would not allow children to be segregated; they would certainly not
tolerate anyone who made religion a divisive factor instead of being inclusive;
and they would never let this infect the minds of the youngest members of the
All of this was conveyed to our teacher with dignity and courtesy. Would he
want to see himself as a man of knowledge to whom the future of the country
could be entrusted, he was asked. Our teacher stood silent, thinking. Then finally
he spoke. Yes, he acknowledged, he had tried to separate the two boys. And no,
he had not bothered to think through the consequences of his actions when he
did so. This was the way he had seen society being structured around him
always, and he was just blindly following the rules. No one had ever taught him
otherwise, or made him see the futility of such divisions. He promised to rectify
the wrong he had done the very next day. And he did do so.
This was how I had a first-hand experience of the way the three religious
elders settled a matter firmly and openly. They made the problem go away
without letting it grow and fester - the essence of good management in any
situation, I later learnt.
It was also the first glimmer of a thought that has shaped me since: that it
must always be our inner convictions and strength of beliefs that dictate our
actions. External forces, temptations and counsels will always be dinned into us,
but those among us who can stand up to what we innately believe to be good and
right will finally be at peace with ourselves. Our country needs citizens who trust
their individuality, who cannot be manipulated by people with unscrupulous
As far as the fact of my religion is concerned, from Rameswaram I followed
my destiny that took me into the world of science and technology. I was always a
believer in science, but the spiritual atmosphere of my youth has stayed with me.
I well understand different points of view, particularly about God. I have read
and assimilated the knowledge contained in different religious texts - from the
Koran to the Gita to the Holy Bible. Together they have made me a product of
this unique land of ours, a syncretic creation of the best of our diverse traditions.
And if ever I am asked what it is like to be a Muslim in this country, I can point
to the people I grew up with - my father, Sastrygal and Father Bodal, indeed
many others like them whom I met later - who have upheld the religious and
moral standards of our nation. In their own ways they have contributed to make
ours a country we can justly proclaim to be a multi-religious, multi-ethnic
nation, where there is space for each of us to breathe. Yes, we have deep
problems and fissures being created daily, but if the generations to come
remember the stories of people like my great-great-grandfather and the imam
and priests of the Rameswaram of long ago, I am sure we will continue to
survive and thrive as a secular democracy forever.
any years ago, I wrote a poem called 'My Mother', which began with these

Sea waves, golden sand, pilgrims' faith,
Rameswaram Mosque Street, all merge into one,

My growing up years, which I now remember with such nostalgia, are
suffused with the memory of Rameswaram, and the two people who were the
centre of my world then - my father and mother. Ours was a middle-class family.
My father had his own small business besides being the imam of the mosque.
My mother, Ashiamma, came from a family, one of whom had some time in the
past been given the title of 'Bahadur' by the British.
My mother was a gentle, down-to-earth, pious woman. She was a devout
Muslim, like my father, and when I think of her I cannot but remember her
saying her namaz five times a day, bending and praying, the look on her face one
of extreme devotion and peacefulness. She had a large family to look after and
that was where most of her energy went. Our family consisted of my siblings and
I, as well as our relatives, like my grandparents and my uncles, all of who lived
in the same house. Providing for everyone was always a stretch on the resources.
It was not a time of plenty for anyone, least of all for us. We had a good steady
income from my father's businesses - his coconut groves and ferry business -
but that just about covered our expenses, and there was never any question about
In these circumstances, my mother remained the ideal partner for my father.
She saved and understood frugality, yet there was never a trace of irritation or
anger in her about the way of life that we led. Almost daily, not only were the
many members of the family fed and looked after satisfactorily, we usually had
umpteen people drop by who would be told to stay back and eat with us. Now
that I think about it, I feel that she cooked and served for as many - if not more
- guests as there were members of the household. Yet, this was accepted as
normal, and no one really remarked on it or thought much about it. Such was the
Indian concept of hospitality once upon a time.
Mine was a happy, secure childhood. One of my earliest memories is of
eating with my mother, sitting on the kitchen floor. We ate off banana leaves.
Rice, aromatic sambar, home made pickles and coconut chutney were the staple
foods. Her cooking was deceptively simple and till today, I have not eaten
sambar that balances the tart and the spicy tastes as delicately as hers did. It is
again in connection with food that another anecdote from my childhood comes
During the World War II years, food was being rationed and there was a
general shortage of nearly everything. My mother and grandmother did their best
to tide over those days, stretching the supplies as much as they could, cutting out
any wastage, often reducing the portions on their plates so that the children had
enough to eat. One day, my mother had made chapattis instead of rice. I sat at
my place on the floor and ate with great relish as she rolled out one fresh
chapatti after another. They kept coming and I kept eating. I was a hungry little
boy after all. When I had finally had my fill, I picked up my banana leaf plate
and walked away to wash up. Later that night, my elder brother took me aside
and scolded me for the first time. 'How could you be so blind, Abdul?' he started.
At first I had no idea why I was being pulled up. I stared uncomprehendingly
at him. Then he softened and explained, 'Did you not notice that there is just
enough for all of us to eat two-three chapattis each? Amma will never say no to
you, but because you kept eating, she kept serving you, and tonight she will go
hungry, because now there is nothing left for her to eat.'
That moment of shame, of heartbreak for my beloved mother, who looked
frail, yet was the toughest woman I knew, broke my heart. I cried to myself, too
mortified to show my face to anyone, and it was only after a few days that I
could bring myself to look her in the face again. What a lesson that was for me
to never forget the needs of those around me! Her love drove her to share her
food with me without a second thought, and after my brother showed me the
truth, I could never again eat without making sure there was enough to go
around - especially for my mother and grandmother.
I left home fairly early in life, as I wanted to pursue my studies in a different,
larger town. As a result, I could not remain my mother's little boy for too long,
unlike many of my friends. But her generosity and caring spirit stayed in my
Again, during the World War II years, when I was about eight years old, I
have described how I took the job of a newspaper delivery boy. My day began
well before dawn, when I had to go for my tuitions, my Koran class, do my
newspaper rounds, go to school and then return home well into the evening,
when I had to study for the next day. In all this, my mother stood by me like a
rock. Early in the morning, she would wake up well before me, draw the water
for my bath and then call me. My mother saw me off and would be waiting for
me to come back an hour or two later, when I would have to go with my father to
the Arabic School for my Holy Koran lessons. As I went from place to place
during the daytime, all I had time for were the meals that would be laid out for
me promptly. I knew that many times my mother decreased her own share so that
I could have enough. When I once questioned her, she only smiled and said, 'You
are a growing child. You have so much to do all through the day. This is what
mothers look out for, don't worry about me.' In the evenings when I returned
home hungry and tired, she would again help me clean up and prepare for the
Among all my siblings, I was always given precedence in taking a place by
her. Once, I remember I fell asleep with my head in her lap. She sat quietly, her
hands softly caressing my hair and cheeks, her touch the most precious balm for
my tiredness. Unknown to me, from somewhere deep within, tears sprang up in
my heart. Before I could stop them, they started flowing down. My eyes were
still closed, yet the tears ran. They dropped on to my folded knees and seeped
into my mother's sari. But she did not stop her caresses. She knew exactly what
was giving rise to those tears - the extreme tiredness of a boy suddenly trying to
be a man. Her fingers ran tenderly through my hair, comforting, soothing and
This simple lady, born and raised in a small southern Indian town, was
perhaps like many other mothers in our land and beyond. She did not step out of
the house and take part in the affairs of the town. She did not make a career in
the way we think of it nowadays. Her realm of work remained the home and the
family. Yet, within that, she served everyone and God with utmost devotion,
selflessness and piety. It is this lesson that I have carried from her life - that it
does not matter how large or small your sphere of activity is, what counts finally
is the commitment that you bring to the job that has been ordained for you in this
My father lived to the age of 102. When he passed away, he left behind a
family that included fifteen grandchildren. His passing away affected me deeply.
I came home from my work at Thumba and sat by my mother for a long time.
When I had to leave, she blessed me in a choked voice. I was in the thick of
building the SLV-3 rocket, and work beckoned me. She never once asked me to
stay back. Should I have done so? Should I not have been so preoccupied with
my work, and instead spent time with this old lady, who I was never to see
again? I have asked myself this, and do not have an answer. My mother passed
away soon after my father did. It was perhaps fitting that she would not live long
alone, without the man whose side she had never left for over eighty years.
After I received the news of her passing, as I made my way to Rameswaram,
memories of her assailed me. The two people who had created me, not just as
their child, but moulded my thoughts and personality, were now no more. I
would have to live out the rest of my life without their guidance. But I knew one
could not have lived long without the other, and that is what comforted me as I
returned to the mosque where I had learnt to pray with my father. The azaan
from that mosque once used to bring all of us together - our parents leading all
the children in the prayers. Now it is a sweet reminder of a beautiful childhood,
of parents lost to time, of a mother who understood her boy's deepest feelings,
even if they remained buried in his heart.

Ours was a large family and I was one of ten siblings. Besides my own brothers
and sisters, cousins and children of distant relatives were always present in the
house and we grew up never knowing the meaning of boredom. There was
always a tree to climb, a game to play or an excursion to plan. We were a happy
bunch of children - squabbling and then making up, sometimes being naughty
and always ready to help each other out.
My sister, Zohra, was one of the older children. She grew up as many girls in
her circumstances did. She went to school and studied, but she was also expected
to help as much as possible around the house. In fact, she was perhaps my
mother's closest companion. The bond of mother and daughter changed into that
of friendship as they toiled for the family, cooking and cleaning, looking after
the young ones, tending to their scraped knees and dripping noses. Like my
mother, she, too, had a soft spot for me. It was perhaps because I was a bit of a
dreamer even then. I was not as boisterous as my companions, and often
preferred to curl up with a paper or a book, rather than plan a prank with the
other boys. Zohra looked out for me as much as she could so that the soft
innocence of her little brother was not destroyed.
When I was quite young, a cousin called Ahmed Jalalluddin entered our
lives. He came like a breath of fresh air to the tiny community. He had studied
up to middle grade, could read and write English, and more than that, his vision
of life was open and large, ready to look beyond the shores of Rameswaram. He
stayed close by and became a part of the daily life of the family very quickly.
Jalalluddin took a great liking to me. He indulged my curiosities and did his
best to find answers to the questions I asked. I was always full of questions about
the things I saw around me - why do birds fly, how is rain created, how do train
engines work and many more such things. Jalalluddin recognized the fact that I
would soon outgrow the school in Rameswaram. He discussed with my father
the need to send me to Ramanathapuram, where there was a bigger, better
My life took its course, and after completing my schooling at
Ramanathapuram, I decided to move to Madras (now Chennai) to study
engineering at the Madras Institute of Technology (MIT). In the intervening
years, Zohra had married Jalalluddin. The two of them were the biggest
supporters of my dreams and ambitions. Zohra was determined that I give wings
to my aspirations and Jalalluddin remained my mentor. Yet, our financial
situation remained the same. Our household was still dependent on the earnings
from the businesses started by my father. How could they afford to pay the sum
600 that was the admission fee at MIT? While today this may seem like a
very small amount, at the time, for us, it was equivalent to nearly a lakh rupees.
That was when I saw the true grit in my sister. Nothing would stop her little
brother, she told her husband. My parents had saved and got some pieces of gold
jewellery made for her. Traditionally, in Indian households, the women may
wear the jewellery on certain occasions, but many also use them as a safeguard
- a kind of insurance policy for rainy days when there are unexpected cash
requirements. Without a moment's further thought, and not worrying that the
jewellery may one day be needed for her own family, for she was now a married
woman, Zohra announced that she would use the pieces as guarantee with a
moneylender and borrow the sum required for my admission.
I was deeply touched by her gesture. It was one of the most selfless things
anyone had ever done for me. At the time of need Zohra had the solution to the
problem, and she gave what she could with a full heart. She knew that her
brother would work hard. She kept faith in my abilities - that I would qualify as
an engineer. Her gold bangles and chain were mortgaged, the money came and I
was admitted to MIT. I vowed at the time to release her jewellery from mortgage
as soon as I started earning. I eventually did do so by studying hard and earning
Like my mother, Zohra lived out her life in Rameswaram. She was as
efficient, cheerful and upright as her and the two of them together symbolize for
me the resilience and resourcefulness of the ordinary Indian woman. This
woman is a person who cannot be cowed down too long by her circumstances.
Often, she goes through life without recognizing her own dreams and ambitions.
Many times she thinks of the ambitions of her husband, or the welfare and
progress of her children. She will think of her father, brothers, sisters first and
place herself behind everyone else. Where are her own dreams, I wonder?
Destiny, tradition, situations will test her again and again. She will have to worry
and compromise, save and innovate. Yet, she will find a way to guide her family
and her dear ones out of any crisis, and she will do so with such love that it will
few remarkable people have appeared at critical times in my life and
proceeded to mould or reorient my ways of thinking; sometimes they have
even changed the course of my life. To these mentors I am always grateful and
remember them more and more each day. Now, if I could have all the time in the
world, I know what I would do; I would spend time in remembering these people
who shaped my life. They are like the sun that warms the face and the winds that
embrace. One such person in my life was Ahmed Jalalluddin.
When I was still a young boy, my father decided to build a boat to start a
ferry business. I was fascinated with the way the boat was taking shape. As each
plank of wood was slotted into its place and the outline of the boat became
clearer, I found it harder and harder to tear myself away from that place by the
beach where the boat was being built. Jalalluddin, who also lived in
Rameswaram and would help my father, was the first to notice my interest in the
boat. Unlike the other adults, who were too busy going about their work, he
would spend some time chatting with me every day. We would talk about the
boat, how it should be built and painted and all the work that still needed to get
done on it. From there an unusual friendship grew between me - a little boy -
and Jalalluddin - a much older, wiser person, who was fifteen years senior to
Our conversations gradually took other turns. As days turned into years and
both of us grew older, Jalalluddin became my brother-in-law - he married my
sister Zohra. Our relationship took on more depth. What I remember most
distinctly from the time are our walks around Rameswaram town. We would set
out almost every evening starting from Mosque Street, where our house was
located, and walk towards the shore of the sea. The town would be busy at the
time, with pilgrims making their way to and from the temple. Our first halt
would be the Shiva temple, where our steps would fall in with those making
their circumambulations. As they said their prayers, some would be kneeling and
touching the ground after every few steps, while others would be helping old
parents or relatives perform the pilgrimage. Amongst these people, our thoughts,
too, would turn towards spiritual matters, and our conversation would often be
Jalalluddin's relationship with God was slightly different from the one I was
used to seeing in my father. My father was a pious man who followed every rule
of worship - not just outwardly but as a deeply felt need within him. Saying the
namaz and every other form of prayer was as much a part of his being as
breathing or eating. Jalalluddin, too, was a devout man. However, for him, God
was almost like a friend. He talked to God, and presented all his problems to
Him in the way one does to a living entity. For him, it was inconceivable that
God would not present a solution if Jalalluddin spoke about his dilemmas to
Him. As we made our way with the pilgrims and I watched them perform their
rituals, and listened to Jalalluddin at the same time, in my mind these two faiths
melded into one. Was it possible that in this serene atmosphere of Rameswaram
the prayers of so many of the faithful, uttered in different tongues and born from
various beliefs, were reaching different gods? It could not be. I was convinced
that the one who heard everyone out was a common entity. But I also secretly
wondered if my friend had a special connection that allowed him to see God
everywhere, and it was that which let him speak so freely to Him.
Jalalluddin was not very highly educated. He had been able to complete his
education till the eighth standard only, as he had had to start working in order to
earn for his family. But he was also among the few in Rameswaram with some
knowledge of the English language. He could read and write English, and
therefore, was in great demand among the residents to write their applications or
any other official letters. Seeing the respect with which he was treated by the
townspeople, I too wanted to be like him and study as much as possible. On his
part, perhaps it was because of his slightly better educational background that
Jalalluddin was among the first people to notice the immense curiosity and thirst
for knowledge that flowed within me. In those days I had an insatiable interest to
learn more about everything, and it was my brother-in-law who indulged my
questions. I plied him with more and more queries and he would answer me as
patiently as he could and with as much knowledge as he had gathered. He
opened my eyes when he talked about so many things that lay outside the
purview of our daily lives - nature, space, scientific discoveries, books and
I have often pondered the question: what creates our personalities? How
much does the environment play a part and how much of it is inborn? If I look
back at my life, I can put a finger on specific qualities that were transmitted to
me from those closest to me. From my parents I learnt honesty, self-discipline,
faith and kindness. And from my closest friends - Jalalluddin and my other
cousin, Samsuddin - I learnt to recognize the fact that every human carries
something special within himself. These men were the ones who saw a spark in
me and encouraged and nurtured me. They were not sophisticated; rather, they
had a direct, intuitive approach to life. They often knew my questions and
ambitions even before I had been able to articulate them to my own self. They
could then draw these out from within me and help me set my life's goals.
As I grew up, Jalalluddin was among the first to encourage me to break away
from the confines of Rameswaram. When I wanted to continue my studies in a
bigger school in a different town, he was the one who made the arrangements,
travelled with me to Ramanathapuram and saw me settled into the Schwartz
High School there. For a boy who had not known life outside the place where I
had grown up, even Ramanathapuram was a big change. I missed my family, my
familiar surroundings, my mother and her cooking. At that time it was
Jalalluddin who instilled in me the power of positive thinking. He would tell me
that I needed to control these emotions in order to fulfil my desires for a better
education. Whenever I felt homesick and sad, I thought of him and his words,
and they gave me the courage I needed to plunge into the unfamiliar life of a
pupil living in a boarding school.
At every stage of my life, till I became an adult in the real sense of the word
- someone who is in control of his own actions - this man walked with me. He
picked me up when I faltered, encouraged me when I felt I could not carry on
and stood by me as I took my first tentative steps in the outside world. How can I
forget the day when he and Samsuddin accompanied me to Bombay (now
Mumbai), to Santa Cruz airport, because I was going to do something no one had
imagined even twenty years earlier in Rameswaram - I was going to the US, to
NASA, on a six-month training programme. I had become an engineer by then
and had been accepted as a rocket engineer by the Indian National Committee
for Space Research (INCOSPAR) who were sending me to the United States.
Jalalluddin and Samsuddin saw me off at Santa Cruz airport. My trepidation
about travelling abroad was reflected in their anxiety about being in a big city
like Bombay. Yet, they carried their dignity upon them like a mantle. I recall
seeing them at the airport gate, and feeling their positivity and optimism reach
me in waves. They were men who saw only the good in me and had implicit
faith in my following the correct path always. Standing there, I was overcome by
my sentiments and my love for them and tears filled my eyes. Through the mist
of the tears I held on to them, and Jalalluddin said to me, 'Abdul, we have always
loved you, and we believe in you. We shall always be proud of you.' How can I
ever forget those words of encouragement?
I now think that Jalalluddin not only held my hands and taught me to walk
tall in this world, he also taught me how to live. I grew into a man with my own
ideas and creative thought processes under his influence - an influence that
remained with me even when I moved far away from him and my family, and
made my way in the world. And, if he taught me the ways of life, how could it
be that he would not teach me the harshest, yet most constant fact of life - death.
While I was working on the SLV-3 rocket project for the Indian Space
Research Organisation (ISRO), news came to me one day that my brother-in-
law, my friend and guide, was no more. It was a deep shock for me. Jalalluddin
was not of the age for this. When I got the news I was dumbstruck. How could
this have happened? How could we all be alive, and this man be no more? In my
shock I remember speaking words that made little sense. I could not think, feel
or move for a time. Finally I gathered myself together, and leaving instructions
with my colleague, I made preparations to leave for Rameswaram.
As I travelled back home, in buses that wheezed and groaned on the inter-
city roads, buffeted by people and the wind blowing in from the open windows,
amidst the chatter of fellow travellers, I felt myself to be completely alone.
Perhaps there comes a time in each of our lives when we finally leave our
childhood selves behind - and this was mine. With Jalalluddin, a part of me also
passed away. Gone forever was the boy who needed to be guided, who asked
questions by the dozen and who knew that whatever he did, there was a pair of
loving hands always ready to hold his own hands and guide him. When I closed
my eyes, images from long ago flashed by - of leaving for Ramanathapuram, of
Jalalluddin arranging the money to buy my books, of him standing at Santa Cruz
airport, tears glistening in his eyes - tears of unbearable pride that can be felt
only by those who have truly loved and brought up a child. I saw him walking
with me on the sandy shores of our little town, pointing out the stars and the
moon, explaining where the sun went when it finally sank into the sea.
I reached home to find my sister grieving piteously. With her was my little
niece Mehboob, her father gone well before his time. I met my father, who was
now a hundred years old, and yet, for the first time, I felt that he had really aged.
The grief of losing his son-in-law seemed to have shifted something within him.
We put our dear friend and son to rest. And the whole time I could not find the
tears to shed at his going. It was as if I was walking in a daze, through a fog of
After the burial, my father, that most perceptive of men even in his great old
age, held my hands and sat me beside him. For the first time I noticed that he,
too, had not shed tears. He said to me, 'Abdul, do you not see how the Lord
strengthens the shadows? Had it been His will, He could have made them
constant. But He makes the sun their guide, little by little He shortens them. He
has made the night for us to rest, and has sent Jalalluddin into a long sleep - a
dreamless sleep, a complete rest of all his being within simple unconsciousness.
Nothing happens that has not been ordained by Allah and in Him we will have to
keep our trust and faith.'
I sat back and reflected on my father's wise words. Death is not something to
be afraid of, and I have never seen it that way. Yet, the sadness that it brings
cannot be shrugged away. We will go when our time will come, but when some
of us go earlier than the others, like Jalalluddin, who did not live to see his
children grow into adults, who did not get to see them married or played with his
grandchildren, the sadness that wells up within the heart is a reality that one has
to go on living with.
My friend Ahmed Jalalluddin was an ordinary man for many. But my friend
and mentor Ahmed Jalalluddin was also a remarkable man. He brought about
change and shaped the minds of those around him with the sheer power of his
love, simplicity and understanding. There are such remarkable men in every city
and village in this country. I was lucky that I found him so near to me and that he
chose to grasp my hands when he did in order to make me the man I would
n my life, which has been long and eventful, I have seen great heights of
success. I have been part of ventures that have contributed to the growth of our
nation in the field of science and technology; I have also had the privilege of
occupying the highest office in the country. There are many achievements to
look back upon - some of my own doing and some where I had the privilege to
be part of teams, which were immensely talented. Yet, I firmly believe that
unless one has tasted the bitter pill of failure, one cannot aspire enough for
success. I have seen both sides of the coin and have learnt life's toughest lessons
when I have stared into the pit of despair that failure brings with it. These
lessons are well worth recounting and remembering, as they have helped me
work my way through many difficult situations.
One of the earliest such episodes from my life happened when I was a
student of aeronautics at MIT. My design teacher there was Professor Srinivasan,
who was also the head of the institute. Once, we were placed in teams of four
students each, and our team had to design a low-level attack aircraft. I was in
charge of coming up with the aerodynamic design. We worked very hard for
weeks. My teammates were designing all the other components, like the
propulsion, structure, control and instrumentation. Since our other course work
was over at the time, we spent long hours discussing our ideas and researching
them. We were all keen to impress our professors with our project. They kept an
eye on the progress and after a few days, Professor Srinivasan asked to see the
design I had created. When I showed it to him, he examined it with his
characteristic critical eye. I stood by, waiting with bated breath to hear his
verdict. I still remember the way his eyebrows crinkled as he looked at the paper
spread out in front of him. Then he straightened up and his next words stunned
me. 'This is just not good enough, Kalam,' he said. He turned stern eyes on me
and continued, 'I expected much better from you. This is dismal work and I am
disappointed that someone with your talent has come up with work like this.' I
stared at the professor, dumbfounded. I had always been the star pupil in any
class and had never ever been pulled up by a teacher for anything. This feeling
of embarrassment and shame was a new experience for me, and I did not like it
one bit. The professor shook his head some more and told me that I had to redo
the entire design, starting from scratch and rethinking all my assumptions. I
agreed shamefacedly. Then he broke the next bad news. Not only was I supposed
to do the work again, I had to finish it in three days! 'Today is Friday afternoon,
young man. I want to see a flawless configuration drawing by Monday evening.
If you are unable to do so, your scholarship will be stopped.' I was even more
dumbfounded now. The scholarship was the only way I could afford to be in
college. Without it I would have to stop my studies. My own ambitions, the
dreams of my parents, my sister and Jalalluddin flashed before my eyes and
seemed to recede to a distance. It was unthinkable that the future could turn so
bleak with a few words spoken by my professor.
I got to work right away, determined to prove myself. I skipped dinner and
remained at the drawing board through the night. Where earlier the components
of my design were floating in my head, now they suddenly came together and
took on forms and shapes I could work with. The concentrated work I put in
seemed to brush away all the cobwebs of the mind. By the next morning, I was
working like a man possessed. I took a short break to eat and freshen up, and
went back to work again. By Sunday evening, my work was nearly complete -
an elegant, neat design that I was proud of. While I was putting my final touches
to it, I sensed a presence in the room. It was the professor, still dressed in his
tennis whites, on his way back from the club. I didn't know how long he had
been standing there, watching me. Now, as our eyes met, he came forward. He
looked critically at my work for many minutes. Then he straightened up and
smiled. To my amazement, he hugged me affectionately. Then patting me on the
back, he said, 'I knew I was putting you under immense pressure when I rejected
your work the other day. I set an impossible deadline - yet you have met it with
work that I can only call outstanding. As your teacher, I had to push you to your
limits so that you could recognize your own true potential.' After two days of
extreme dejection, those words were music to my ears and revived my
That day I learnt two lessons: a teacher who has his or her student's progress
in mind is the best possible friend, because the teacher knows how to make sure
that you excel. And second, there is no such thing as an impossible deadline. I
have worked on many tough assignments, some of which had the country's top
leaders watching over my work, but the assurance I gained in my capabilities at
MIT thanks to Professor Srinivasan, helped me later in life too.
After MIT, I started my working life. Little did I know that even tougher
lessons were to follow. I went to work at Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)
in Bangalore. There I learnt a lot about aircraft and their design and technology.
By now I was very sure that I wanted a career in flying. When I emerged as a
graduate aeronautical engineer from HAL, I got two job opportunities. One was
in the air force and another at the Directorate of Technical Development and
Production (DTD&P [Air]) at the Ministry of Defence. I received interview calls
from both. The first was in Dehra Dun and the second in Delhi. I set forth with
great hope in my heart.
My first close sight of an aircraft had been at MIT, where two
decommissioned aircraft were kept for the demonstration of various subsystems
to the students. They had held a special fascination for me, and I was drawn to
them again and again. They represented for me man's ability to think beyond his
boundaries, and to give wings to dreams. I had chosen aeronautical engineering
as my area of study because of my fascination for flying. Over the years I had
nurtured the hope to be able to fly; to handle a machine as it rose higher and
higher in the stratosphere was my dearest dream.
As I made my way from Madras to north India for the interviews, I played
this dream over and over again in my mind. I was finally on the threshold of
becoming a pilot! The journey from Tamil Nadu to Dehra Dun was a long one -
not just geographically but also in terms of the distance I would travel from my
humble origins to the prize that lay in the foothills of the Himalayas - a place in
the air force as a pilot.
I first halted in Delhi for my interview at DTD&P. I was confident and the
interview was an easy one, not requiring me to push the boundaries of my
knowledge too far. I spent a week in Delhi and then proceeded to Dehra Dun for
my interview at the Air Force Selection Board. Here, I should mention that at the
time, as a young man in my early twenties, I was just beginning to understand
how to conduct myself in the wider world. When I had first moved from
Rameswaram to the bigger cities for my studies, I was a shy, tongue-tied boy. I
had to work hard to develop some assertiveness in my personality. I did this by
trying to communicate with different people from all kinds of backgrounds. It
was not easy and there were many moments of frustration and disappointment.
However, by the time I finished my studies and headed out to look for a job, my
personality was better developed and I was able to articulate my thoughts well
enough in English and Tamil.
To return to my interview at the Air Force Selection Board, as I started
answering the queries put forth to me, I realized that along with qualifications
and engineering knowledge, they were also looking for a certain kind of
'smartness' in the candidate. Physical fitness and an articulate manner were what
they were seeking. I gave it my best. I had wanted this job for so long and so
deeply that I was determined yet anxious, confident and at the same time tense.
Finally the results were announced. I had stood ninth in a batch of twenty-five.
There were only eight places available. I had failed to realize my dream of
becoming an air force pilot.
I still remember the ache in my heart as I attempted to make sense of what
had happened. When a dearly held desire begins to break up, one can feel
nothing but despair and emptiness as one tries to come to terms with the end of a
dream. I could not bear to be indoors after seeing the result. I had to go out for
air and be in the open, because all around me the walls seemed to close in. I
walked around for a while till I reached the edge of a cliff. I stood there looking
down at the shimmering waters of a lake and wondered what I should do next.
Plans needed to be changed and priorities reassessed. I decided to go to
Rishikesh for a few days and seek a new way forward.
I reached Rishikesh the next morning. I took a dip in the Ganga - a river I
had heard so much about, but was seeing and experiencing for the first time in
my life. I had been told about the Sivananda Ashram that was located a little way
up a hill. I walked there. As I entered I felt a strange vibration, a sense of
tranquility that was like a balm for my restless soul. Sadhus were seated all
around, deep in meditation. I hoped that one among them would be able to
answer the questions that troubled me and soothe my worries. I was granted an
audience with Swami Sivananda himself. My being a Muslim did not affect him
in any way. Instead, before I could speak, he asked what had filled me with
sorrow. I only fleetingly wondered how he knew about my sadness before I
embarked on an explanation of the recent developments in my life. He listened
calmly and then washed away my anxieties with a smile of deep peacefulness.
His next words were some of the most profound I had ever heard. His feeble yet
deep voice still resonates when I think of them:
'Accept your destiny and go ahead with your life. You are not destined to
become an air force pilot. What you are destined to become is not revealed now
but it is predetermined. Forget this failure, as it was essential to lead you to your
destined path. Search, instead, for the true purpose of your existence
Surrender yourself to the wish of God.'
That lesson made a deep impression on my mind. Truly, why fight against
destiny? This failure, I was sure, was part of a larger plan that God had for me. I
ruminated long about this as I went back to Delhi. There, I found that I had been
accepted as senior scientific assistant at DTD&P. I gave up my dream of making
a career out of flying. I understood now that there was plenty of other work to be
done, and I was going to put my heart and soul into the job that had been given
In this way I started my working life. Like me, I am sure almost every person
who sets out with a goal has had to face unexpected obstacles. We've had to
rethink our goals, reorient our paths. Each setback teaches us a new facet of life
and something about our own personalities. When we tackle obstacles, we find
hidden reserves of courage and resilience we did not know we had. And it is
only when we are faced with failure do we realize that these resources were
always there within us. We only need to find them and move on with our lives.
henever I talk to the youth anywhere in India, I am invariably asked one
question: which are your favourite books? Even though modern life has
changed many of our habits, reading is one activity that is still popular in our
country. From newspapers and magazines to books, there is no dearth of reading
matter available to us. It is heartening that with the growth of the literacy rate in
India, the demand for books of different kinds has grown. This shows, I think,
that people are not just learning to read and write in school. They are also getting
educated and improving their ways of thinking and sharpening their powers of
understanding. Reading helps to build these invaluable qualities and the habit of
reading can never be encouraged enough.
For me personally, books have always been close companions. I discovered
some when I was very young, and have never forgotten them. They are like
friends who have led me by the hand and guided me through life. Their words
breathe meaning into many situations, for I use them to understand the world
I have also come across many book lovers who have fanned my love of
books. One person in particular who helped me out once by

comes to mind. This happened in Madras many years back, when I was studying
at MIT. I had recently become interested in Russian literature, and had obtained
a copy of a book that I was reading with great interest. However, it so happened
that I also needed to go home for a few days and as always there was hardly any
money in my pocket - not enough to buy a train ticket even for Rameswaram! I
saw no way out other than selling the book I was reading in order to tide over
this monetary crisis. The place where I went for all such transactions was called
More Market in Madras. It was a covered shopping area where all manner of
goods were available. But what interested me most was a narrow area towards
the rear where second-hand books were bought and sold. There was one shop
which I always visited, as the proprietor had become a friend. He had introduced
me to many writers and helped me become a voracious reader by providing me
with many interesting and uplifting books. That day, when I presented myself at
his shop and told him that I needed to sell the book I was reading, he looked at
me with a mixture of pity and sadness. He could see that I did not want to part
with the book, yet he also understood my reason for wanting to do so. Then he
came up with an idea that was brilliant in its simplicity and solved all my
problems! Why didn't I leave the book with him as a sort of mortgage? He would
loan me the amount he would have paid me for it. When I had the money I could
return the amount to him and take back my book. He promised not to sell it to
anyone in the meantime! My happiness knew no bounds at this sudden change in
my fortunes. I was now able to go home and not lose my book. Needless to say,
my book-loving friend kept his word, and that book stayed with me for many
years - a reminder of the kindness of strangers and the equally strange world of
I started reading the English classics only when I was in my final year at St
Joseph's College. At the time, I discovered the works of Leo Tolstoy, Walter
Scott and Thomas Hardy. The settings of the stories were completely alien to me,
and the language different from what I was used to, but the stories of human
relationships and their views of society appealed to me. After this I discovered
the works of certain philosophers and started taking an interest in reading about
science, in particular physics.
Here, I am reminded of a story about Albert Einstein. When he was twelve,
his mentor, Max Talmud, gave him a book on Eucledian geometry. This book
opened the young Einstein's mind to concepts of pure thought and how to
explore universal truths, and he began to realize the power of the human mind.
Over the years I have read innumerable books. But if I were asked to name
those that are most dear to me, or the ones that affected me deeply, I would
The first is called
Light from Many Lamps,
edited by Lillian Eichler Watson.
I first came across this book in 1953, in the very same second-hand bookstore in
Madras I had mentioned earlier (the joys of browsing in a crammed bookshop
and stumbling upon a rare treasure like this is indescribable). I consider the book
to be my companion, because I have leafed through it and read and reread it so
many times over the years that I have possessed it. Considered a classic
Lights from Many Lamps
contains the writings of various
authors. The editor has compiled inspiring stories written by different writers,
and has also, very helpfully, mentioned how these came to be written and the
lessons to be derived from them.
There has hardly been an occasion when the works mentioned in the book
have not brought me solace in my hours of sadness, or uplifted me when I
needed advice. If I am ever in danger of being swept away by my own emotions,
this book brings about a balance in my thinking. My copy of the book has been
bound and rebound so many times that I was delighted when a friend found a
new edition and gifted it to me some years ago.
The second work that has been influential in my thinking is the
Written by Thiruvalluvar more than 2,000 years ago, it is a collection of 1,330
rhyming Tamil couplets or aphorisms (
). This work talks about almost
every aspect of life and is considered to be one of the most important pieces of
work in Tamil literature. To me, it has provided a code of conduct for my life. It
is a work that truly elevates the mind. Here is a
that is particularly dear to

(Think of rising higher. Let it be your only thought. Even if your object
be not attained, the thought itself will have raised you.)

The next book that I would like to mention is called

the Nobel laureate and doctor-turned-philosopher Alexis Carrel. In it, he talks
about how humans can be healed when both the body and mind are treated
together. His description of the human body - how it is an intelligent, integrated
system - is explained clearly and brilliantly. I think this work should be read by
everyone, in particular those who aim to study the medical sciences.
Religious texts of different religions have influenced me greatly. I have
studied these and tried to find the answers to questions that have appeared in my
mind through my life. The Koran, the Vedas, the Bhagwad Gita, all hold deep
philosophical insights into the plight of man and have helped me resolve many
dilemmas at different times in my life.
Just to illustrate how these texts can provide insight into any aspect of life,
let me recount a few examples. After I had worked for a while as an aeronautical
engineer in Bangalore, I was called for an interview for the post of rocket
engineer at INCOSPAR, the space agency started by Dr Vikram Sarabhai. I was
very nervous about the interview and did not know what to expect. At the time,
these words by Lakshmana Sastry (my father's friend and the priest at the
Rameswaram temple) quoting the Gita gave me courage: 'All beings are born to
delusion overcome by the dualities that arise from wish and hate but those
men of virtuous deeds in whom sin has come to an end, freed from the delusion
of dualities, worship me steadfast in their vows.' I told myself the best way to
win was not to need to win and I went for the interview with this attitude.
India's space programme grew and with it, I got to work with many people
who helped build it and give it shape. My connection with the Indian Space
Research Organisation goes back right to the time of its inception. When I look
at the way the organization has grown and the kind of service it has provided our
country, as well as the people who shaped its objectives and gave it direction, I
am reminded of a

from the Gita which says: 'See the flower, how
generously it distributes perfume and honey. When its work is done, it falls away
quietly. Try to be like the flower, unassuming despite all its qualities.' The
stalwarts of the space programme were like these flowers - they came and gave
direction and then made way for new ideas and new thoughts.
Again, while I was at the Defence Research and Development Organisation
(DRDO) working on developing India's indigenous missile programme, I
worked with many brilliant and dedicated engineers and leaders. The words from
the Holy Koran ring in my ears when I think of them: 'Light upon light. Allah
guides His light to whom He will.'
In my personal life too, these works have given me comfort and helped me
make sense of the vicissitudes of life. When I lost my parents within the span of
a year, I remember praying at the mosque in Rameswaram, overcome with grief
and regret for not having met my mother more often before she passed away. But
after some time this line from the Koran came to me. It told me that the passing
away of souls is inevitable and the only constant is God: 'Your wealth and
children are only a temptation whereas Allah! With Him is eternal award.'
Poetry has been one of my first loves in the realm of literature. The works of
T.S. Eliot, Lewis Carroll and William Butler Yeats have played out in my mind
over and over again, appearing to give context and meaning to various
happenings. In my endeavours in the scientific arena, how appropriate have been
these lines by Lewis Carroll:

Let craft, ambition, spite,
Be quenched in Reason's night,
Till weakness turn to might,
Till what is dark be light,
Till what is wrong be right!

And when work was an endless cycle of back-breaking hours, and days
merged into days till I could hardly tell one from the other, Samuel Taylor
Coleridge's words described my state of mind the best:

Day after day, day after day,
We stuck, nor breath, nor motion;
As idle as a painted ship
Upon a painted ocean

Often, I have had to work trying to meet impossible deadlines. A colleague,
Group Captain Narayanan, was impatient to achieve our goal of creating guided
missiles. He told me once, 'You name the thing and I will get it for you, but do
not ask me for time.' At the time I had laughed at his hurry and quoted these
words by T.S. Eliot:

These are just some of the writers and works that have influenced me deeply.
They are all like old friends - familiar, well-meaning and reassuring. They know
when to enter my mind; they know when I am in some dilemma, or my moments
of sadness and contemplation. They are also with me in my deepest, most joyous
moments. In this age of quick and easy communication, when information
comes to us in byte-sized pieces, the charm of the written word can never be
allowed to be lost. I once wrote this poem on books that I often read out to
young people. It sums up my feelings for the written word:

Books were always my friends
Last more than fifty years
Books gave me dreams
Dreams resulted in missions
Books helped me confidently take up the missions
Books gave me courage at the time of failures
Good books were for me angels
Touched my heart gently at the time
Hence I ask young friends to have books as friends
Books are your good friends.
have recounted in an earlier chapter some of my first experiences of dejection
and failure and the lessons they held for me. I have understood now that after
the feelings of disappointment subside, and one gains perspective, these
experiences can change our ways of thinking. They also deeply impact our souls,
I believe, and bring us face to face with existential issues. When that happens,
we need to embrace the events and analyze how we responded - did we allow
them to merely roll over us like waves, or did we dive deeper into the matter and
use it to gain insights into ourselves?
Needless to say, it is usually events of great magnitude that shift something
within us at a fundamental level. When we are unable to live up to the high
standards and expectations of those we value the most; or get involved in matters
that impact the lives of millions; or when it is a matter of life and death - these
are the times when our sense of self and our ego witness deep changes.
I can recall a few such markers from my working life. When I was leading
the project teams for SLV-3, the satellite launch vehicle, and for Agni, India's
first indigenous missile, expectations from me and my teams were sky-high -
both from the government and from the people of the country. The media
scrutiny, though nothing compared to what it is today, was also intensive. SLV-3
failed on its first launch and the Agni project, too, went through numerous ups
and downs and witnessed pre-launch difficulties. These were jobs that put the
teams and me under immense pressure and the stakes were very high. Not
getting these perfect the first time around negated the many other successes we
had achieved despite various hurdles. Those days of introspection and analysis
of the reasons for failure will remain deeply embedded in my memory. But what
leaves an even greater impact is when people we know and work with, or those
on whom we depend to implement our ideas and designs, show uncommon
dedication and even suffer in the process. I have seen this, too, in my working
life and each time I have been moved beyond words by what I witnessed.
In the 1960s and '70s, I was working at Thumba Equatorial Rocket
Launching Station (TERLS). Under the guidance of Dr Vikram Sarabhai, we
were making our own rockets, SLVs and satellites. We were also working with
laboratories around the country in preparing payloads for the sounding rockets.
Almost all physical laboratories in India were involved in the sounding rocket
programme, each having its own mission and payload. These payloads were
required to be integrated with the rocket structure. One of my colleagues at the
Payload Preparation Laboratory was Sudhakar. Once, we were working on a pre-
launch schedule, and were filling and remotely pressing a dangerous sodium and
thermite mix. Like most days at Thumba, which is on the east coast, it was hot
and humid. Sudhakar and I had been working for a long time. The heat was
intense but we were unmindful of it. After filling six such mixes, we decided to
visit the payload room and inspect the progress to see for ourselves if the mix
had been filled properly. Perhaps, because we were so deeply immersed in our
work, we forgot a basic fact of science: pure sodium, when in contact with water,
can be dangerous. As Sudhakar and I leaned in to inspect the mixture, a drop of
sweat from Sudhakar's forehead fell into it. Before we could react, we were
thrown backwards by a powerful explosion! It shook the room and both of us
fell. For a few seconds, the shock paralysed me. In a matter of seconds a fire
broke out from the explosion. In front of our horrified eyes, the laboratory was
soon burning away fiercely. It was a fire due to sodium, so using water would
not help. Rather, it would add to the devastation. The laboratory was now
nothing short of an inferno. Later, when I relived the events, it all seemed to take
place in slow motion - the accident, the explosion and then the fire. In reality, all
this happened within the space of a few seconds. Even as I got to my feet,
Sudhakar showed a startling presence of mind. He broke open the glass window
of the payload room with his bare hands. Then, without a moment's hesitation,
he turned to me and pushed me out before proceeding to jump himself. These
actions could not have taken more than a few minutes, yet if one considers the
intensity of the explosion and the terrible heat of the fire, by the time it took
Sudhakar to figure out our escape and save me, he himself got terribly injured.
Not only was he severely burnt, but his hands were also bleeding from having
broken the glass pane with no protection.
As we staggered away from the room that was now engulfed in flames, I
held on to Sudhakar and thanked him for saving me. Despite the intense pain he
was in, he smiled and acknowledged my words. He went on to spend many
weeks in hospital recovering from his injuries. As for me, not only had I been in
the most terrible accident of my life, I was also experiencing for the first time the
feelings of a survivor. Knowing that someone willingly and instinctively put his
life at risk in order to save yours is an incredibly humbling experience. People
who have survived and been rescued from mortal danger face a gamut of
emotions - from relief to guilt to gratitude. In my case it also came with a
feeling of added responsibility. If Sudhakar had thought my life was worth
saving without minding his own safety, then I needed more than ever to see that
all the work we were doing together did not suffer an instant's delay.
Sudhakar's story of courage has been an abiding source of inspiration for me.
Whenever I feel myself giving importance to the small issues of life, when I find
myself losing sight of the larger picture, perhaps losing sight of the fact that I am
just one in a humanity of billions and less than a speck in this universe, at those
times I remember this incredible man. He looked like any other - a scientist like
all of us going about his job - yet he rose above the most basic of fears, that of
saving your own self, and did something extraordinary.
There is another incident that still leaves its painful imprint on my heart
when I think about it. This was the Arakkonam crash of 1999. It left a deep well
of sadness within me and altered my ego structure forever. Soon after it
happened, I absorbed its importance but buried my feelings under a mountain of
work. It was only years later, while talking to a close friend when we were
writing a book together, that I could articulate my feelings and recount what had
happened without sinking into regret and sadness.
On 11 January 1999, two aircraft took off from Bangalore towards the
Arakkonam-Chennai coastline on a scientific mission for the Airborne
Surveillance Platform (ASP). One was an Avro with an aircraft surveillance
system mounted atop as a motodome (a dish-like structure fixed on the aircraft
body). It climbed to 10,000 feet and set course for the coast where the radar
testing was being carried out somewhere over the coastline. Fifteen minutes
before the Avro took off, an AN-32 aircraft, which was the target aircraft for the
radar testing, had also taken off from Bangalore. The testing happened for nearly
one and half hours and everyone was happy with the performance of the radar
system. The AN-32 landed at Arakkonam at around 4 p.m. The Avro ASP
aircraft also set course towards Arakkonam at around this time. As it started its
descent from 10,000 to 5,000 feet, all was well. But when the Avro was about 5
nautical miles away from the airfield, at an altitude somewhere between 3,000
and 5,000 feet, the motodome fell off. The sudden imbalance made the aircraft
unstable and it crashed immediately. There were eight men on board. All of them
The news came to me when I was in the South Block, in a meeting of the
Defence Research Council. I left midway and flew to Bangalore. Air Chief
Marshal A.Y. Tipnis was also there. The days that followed were the most heart-
rending. I met the bereaved families - the young wives, some with infants. What
consolation could I offer them? That their beloved husbands and sons had died in
the cause of defence preparedness? Is that of any solace to people when their
worst fears have come true? I was speechless and shell-shocked when one young
mother pointed to her baby and said, 'Who will look after this young life?' The
mother of another asked me something that haunts me still, 'Why did you do this
The crash had been of such intensity that we could not locate any remains of
the eight men. All we could do was prepare some coffins for the comfort of the
families. We placed them in the air force hall and somehow I made a speech,
bidding farewell to the eight men who had set out that afternoon to do their jobs,
but never came home. I returned to my room that night exhausted and worn out
with grief, worry and guilt. I wrote in my diary:

The lamps are different
But the light is same
Worldly joys you returned to the world
You remain in my innermost soul.

As years passed after this incident, I moved from my office at South Block to
Rashtrapati Bhavan. But there, too, the cries of the widows, the grief of the
devastated parents and the wailing of the infants remained with me. The fact that
they did not even get to see the men for the last time and had to make do with
symbolic coffins broke my heart when I thought about it. When grand plans for
scientific and defence technologies are made, do the people in power think about
the sacrifices the people in the laboratories and fields have to make? Political
rhetoric alone does not build a nation unless it is backed by the power of
sacrifice, toil and virtue. That is true nation-building.
When we obtain positions of power over others, we believe that we have
reached the pinnacle of success. But it is at this time that we need to look back
and be aware of the multitudes on whose hard work and sacrifices we have built
our castles. When I was speaking to my friend, Arun Tiwari, about this episode,
he asked me, 'What is the message?' My reply was, 'Don't pretend to be a candle,
be a moth. Know the power hidden in serving. We seem to have got stuck with
external forms of politics and mistaking them to be nation-building. It is
sacrifices, toil and valour that are seldom seen that truly make a nation.'
Now, when I think back on these incidents, not only of their immediate
impact but the events that unfolded subsequently - of Sudhakar in hospital, of
the compensation that the families received from the government for their fallen
men, but only after a long-drawn-out process - I feel a profound aloneness too.
In sadness you are truly alone. That is when your true self is revealed to you, and
I found myself reaching out to a larger consciousness, of the awareness that
these questions about the nature of life and existence were triggering resolutions
and giving birth to new depths of wisdom. Each one of us has to confront death
and heartbreak in our lives, but if there is something I have learnt in my eight
decades of life on this planet, it is that these moments are our true friends. Joy is
fleeting, whereas true happiness and calm can come to us only after intense pain,
when we have confronted ourselves in the mirror of our souls and understood the
eachers and mentors come at various stages into our lives. As a child, I
looked up to my parents and my teachers. Then my dear friend and brother-
in-law, Ahmed Jalalluddin, guided me in the crucial years when I turned from a
child into a man. And as my career was beginning, I was immensely lucky to
come in the orbit of a man such as Dr Vikram Sarabhai.
A scientist, educationist, institution builder and visionary, Dr Sarabhai was
one of modern India's greatest thinkers and doers. He combined an acute
intelligence with the qualities of a fine leader. It was the country's good fortune
that he was chosen to helm its fledgling space programme after Independence.
Much has been written about him and his many achievements - that he set up
ISRO, articulated India's space mission, he was chairman of the Atomic Energy
Commission and set up a number of other industries and educational institutions,
not the least being the Indian Institute of Management (IIM), Ahmedabad. Yet,
from where I saw him, he was all this - these were the stuff of legends and made
him somewhat of a heroic figure for a young rocket engineer like me - and he
I first met him when I was called for an interview by INCOSPAR for the
position of rocket engineer. The call for the interview had come to me quite
unexpectedly, after Professor M.G.K. Menon of the Tata Institute of
Fundamental Research (TIFR) saw my work on the Nandi hovercraft in
Bangalore. I had little idea of what to expect at the interview, or who would be
conducting it. Neither did I know exactly what areas of my knowledge the
interviewers would test. I went to Bombay with an open mind, telling myself not
to raise my expectations too much. Life had already taught me that the best way
to win is to not covet the win too much, instead to keep a calm and open mind to
I was interviewed by Dr Sarabhai, Professor Menon and Mr Saraf, who was
the deputy secretary of the Atomic Energy Commission. Each one of them was a
storehouse of scientific knowledge, yet the warmth and graciousness that I felt in
the room was remarkable. That interview set the tone for my future relationship
with Dr Vikram Sarabhai. He probed more into my thought processes, trying to
not only find out my level of knowledge, but to know what I was made of as a
person, where my goals lay and the possibilities for growth that I held within me,
both as a professional and as a human being. He was encouraging, affable and
listened to me in such a way that instinctively I knew that here was a man who
was not recruiting just an engineer, rather he was looking at my future potential
and was investing his time and care in me. In my professional life this was the
first time that I had come across someone of his stature who seemed ready to
envelop my thoughts and dreams into his larger vision for the country's space
I was inducted into INCOSPAR. It was like a dream come true for me, and a
great career breakthrough. As I settled down into my role and got to know the
institution and its processes and people, I was struck by how different it was
from where I had worked earlier. The atmosphere was much more relaxed, and
labels and hierarchy were not as important.
Soon after this I heard the story of how Dr Sarabhai set up the Thumba
Equatorial Rocket Launching Station. It is a story I never tire of telling, because
to me it is the perfect coming together of science and spirituality - the twin
driving forces of my life.
It was the year 1962 and Dr Vikram Sarabhai was looking for a site to
establish a space research station. He visited a number of places. Thumba in
Kerala, in southern India, was selected as it is near the equatorial region and is
ideally suited for ionospheric research in the upper atmosphere, apart from the
study of the atmospheric structure. When Dr Sarabhai visited Thumba, the
locality had a number of villages and thousands of fishing folk were living in
that area. It also had a beautiful ancient church, the St Mary Magdalene Church,
and the bishop's house nearby. Dr Sarabhai met many politicians and bureaucrats
in order to get the place for building research facilities but it was difficult to
obtain permissions. Finally he was asked to see the bishop of Trivandrum,
Reverend Father Dr Peter Bernard Pereira. It was a Saturday when Dr Sarabhai
met the bishop. The bishop smiled and asked him to meet him the next day,
Sunday. That day, after service at the church, the bishop told the congregation,
'My children, I have a famous scientist with me who wants our church and the
place I live for the work of space science research. Dear children, science seeks
truth by reasoning. In one way, science and spiritualism seek the same divine
blessings for doing good. My children, can we give God's abode for a scientific
mission?' The church reverberated with a chorus of 'Amen' from the
congregation. Subsequently, Reverend Dr Peter Bernard Pereira took the noble
decision to dedicate the church building to India's national goal of establishing
ISRO. That was where we had our design centre, started rocket assembly, design
of filament winding machine and the bishop's house was our scientists' place.
The church building has been maintained with love and care ever since and is a
reminder to all of us of where the beginnings of our space programme lay. Today
it houses the Indian Space Museum. Later, TERLS led to the establishment of
the Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC) and multiple space centres
When I think of this event, I can see how enlightened spiritual and scientific
leaders work harmoniously for larger goals. Later, a new church and new schools
were established in record time at Thumba. The birth of TERLS and then VSSC
gave India the capability to design, develop and produce worldclass rocket
systems. India developed the capability of launching geo-synchronous, sun-
synchronous and meteorology spacecraft, communication satellites and remote
sensing satellites, thereby providing fast communication, weather forecasting
and also locating water resources for the country. Dr Vikram Sarabhai is no
longer among us, neither is Reverend Dr Peter Bernard Pereira, but I see them as
flowers that blossom to bring value to others' lives. This is described in the
Bhagwad Gita: 'See the flower, how generously it distributes perfume and honey.
It gives to all, gives freely of its love. When its work is done, it falls away
quietly. Try to be like the flower, unassuming despite all its qualities.'
This story of how we got a rocket-launching facility is an inspirational
message for all generations. It is about the integration of minds. Nowhere in the
world has a church been given for scientific research; it has happened only in
India. It is a great message to be spread. The message is, the best component of
religion can be transformed into a spiritual force that will shape society.
As I continued my work at what became ISRO, I came into contact with Dr
Sarabhai more and more often. He was giving shape to his vision of the country's
space programme by setting up the facility at Thumba, by conceiving the idea of
India building its own SLV and at the same time building a Rocket-Assisted
Take-Off System (RATO), which would enable military aircraft to take off even
from the most hostile terrain. I would be amazed at the way his mind worked -
the clear ideas and the ability to look ahead even when such things were not
apparent to the rest of us.
Dr Sarabhai's leadership qualities were such that he could inspire even the
junior-most person in an organization with a sense of purpose. In my opinion,
there were some basic qualities that made him a great leader. Let me mention
them one by one.
Firstly, he was always ready to listen. In Indian institutions, what often
hinders growth is the reluctance of those at the top to listen to their juniors and
subordinates. There is a belief that all decisions and ideas must come in a top-to-
down manner. The line between leadership and bullying is a thin one. Dr
Sarabhai amazed us often with the amount of trust he placed in us. At
INCOSPAR we were essentially a bunch of young, inexperienced engineers with
large quantities of zeal and enthusiasm within us. He harnessed this youthful
spirit by giving us a vision and by also making us feel that we were part of a
larger whole. His visits to Thumba would be preceded by days of feverish
activity, as each of us wanted to show him something new that had been
developed - be it a new design, new fabrication or even a new administrative
process. He groomed us to become leaders in our own rights.
A second quality that I believe stands a leader in good stead is the ability to
think creatively. When Dr Sarabhai decided that we should build the SLV and
the RATO, there appeared to be no immediate link between the two. Yet, time
and again it was proved to us that his thoughts and tasks that initially seemed
random were actually deeply interconnected. I was quick to realize this, and
made up my mind early on to remain alert and focused in order to be assigned
unusual and demanding tasks to be implemented at my laboratory. In the larger
perspective, Dr Sarabhai envisioned India's space programme as an integrated
whole, which would encompass the design and manufacture of rockets,
satellites, launch vehicles and launch facilities. A wide-ranging programme for
development of rocket fuels, propulsion systems, aeronautics and aerospace
materials, tracking systems and instruments also gathered pace at the Space
Science and Technology Centre and Physical Research Laboratory at
Ahmedabad. When Dr Sarabhai gave shape to a vision to develop rockets in
India, he was questioned, along with the political leadership, on the relevance of
such a programme when a vast majority in the country was battling the demons
of hunger and poverty. Yet, he was in agreement with Jawaharlal Nehru that
India could only play a meaningful role in the affairs of the world if the country
was self-reliant in every manner, and should be able to apply advanced
technologies to alleviate real-life problems. Thus our space programme was
never simply a desire to be one among an elite group of nations, neither was it a
matter of playing catch-up with other countries. Rather, it was an expression of
the need for developing indigenous capabilities in telecommunications,
A third quality that I observed in Dr Sarabhai, and which I have tried to
incorporate in my own way of working, was an ability to build teams. Dr
Sarabhai had an uncanny knack of spotting the right person for the job. He
would then back the person completely even if he or she lacked experience. He
also had his own ways of raising morale - a much-required ability in a leader,
particularly in a field like ours, where we often had to battle odds and failures.
When required he could make the bleakest scenario appear not so dark, he would
praise us even if we had not completely reached our goal if he felt that it was
justified, and he never stinted on using humour to alleviate the tensions inherent
in our field. All of this helped him build teams and institutions that remained
steadfastly loyal to him and his vision. Each person knew he could contribute,
and that the contribution would be recognized and valued.
And finally, that great quality of his - to look beyond failures. I remember
that for one of his visits to Thumba we had prepared a demonstration of the
nose-cone jettisoning mechanism of the SLV stage we were working on. The
plan was that when Dr Sarabhai pressed a switch, the pyro system would be
activated through a timer circuit. But when he pressed the switch as requested,
nothing happened. I was in a state of shock, along with my colleague Pramod
Kale, who had designed and integrated the timer circuit. We quickly gauged the
problem as being one within the timer, and gave direct access to the pyro after
detaching it. When Dr Sarabhai pressed the switch this time, the pyros were fired
and the nose cone was jettisoned, as it was supposed to. Dr Sarabhai
congratulated us on our work, but there was a thoughtful look on his face as he
said goodbye. That evening I was asked to meet him at the Kovalam Palace
Hotel in Trivandrum. I had an uneasy feeling as I made my way there. He met
me with his usual warmth and spoke about the rocket launching station. Then he
turned to the incident of the morning. I readied myself to be upbraided. Instead,
Dr Sarabhai delved into deeper issues - were we unenthused by the job, or was it
not challenging enough for us? After talking to me, we finally came upon a
reason behind that morning's failure. We needed an integrated space for the
system integration of all our rocket stages and rocket systems. After pinpointing
this reason, Dr Sarabhai stayed up late into the night redefining roles and coming
up with a new department - the Rocket Engineering Section.
As I have mentioned, mistakes and failures are a part of every project,
particularly in ones like ours where we work on a number of systems and various
teams are responsible for different stages, where even a small error at one stage
can put to waste years of hard work. Dr Sarabhai used these mistakes as
gateways for innovation and the development of new systems. He had the ability
to look beyond the specific error and read what lay behind it. He kept room for
errors and instead tried to analyze how we could make them manageable, so that
we ruled the project, and not our fear of failure.
The place ISRO now has in the community of space-faring nations is second
to none. It has developed worldclass satellites, satellite and rocket launchers and
has provided invaluable service to the country in the fields of scientific research,
innovation, education and telecommunication facilities. So much so that it has
sent an orbiter to the moon, the Chandrayaan 1, and will soon send a probe to
Mars. All of this grew from the seeds planted by Dr Sarabhai and nurtured by the
likes of Satish Dhawan and subsequent chairmen of the organization.
My relationship with Vikram Sarabhai was a deeply emotional and
intellectual one. Time and again he placed his faith in me to lead teams that
would design and develop mechanisms to take India further and further on her
course to becoming a self-reliant nation, in terms of science and defence. He
took the young rocket engineer sitting before him, answering his questions with
honesty and clarity, into his fold and shared his own dream of building rockets
and missiles with him. He stood by me in moments of crisis and doubt, of failure
and success, guiding me, pointing me on the right path when necessary or
showing me where the path lay when I was confused. He was a giant among
men, and I was fortunate that I could grow in his shadow.
Dr Sarabhai's death came as a cruel blow to me, not least because it was
completely unexpected. In December 1971, I spoke to him from Delhi, updating
him about a missile panel meeting that I had just attended there. He was in
Thumba then and asked me to meet him at Trivandrum airport after landing from
Delhi, as he would be on his way to Bombay. That meeting never happened. I
landed at Trivandrum a few hours later to hear the news that Dr Sarabhai had
passed away from a cardiac arrest. I came to know that he died an hour after our
conversation. The man who nurtured scientists and engineers who would go on
to head important scientific projects of the country, who was a great scientist and
a leader, was no more there for us to turn to. But before his going he had
equipped us with the knowledge, confidence and foresight required to take on all
sorts of challenges, and I believe that our greatest homage to him was for each of
us to realize our own true potential, which he had spotted at the very first
It is perhaps a pattern in my life that those closest to me pass away suddenly,
without warning. What has that taught me? For each person I lost I found a new
layer of grief to cover myself with, and each time I tried to bring something of
their essence into my own being - be it unconditional love, kindness and piety.
In Dr Sarabhai's case, perhaps it was the ability to look ahead - to plan, to build
and to create. If I have achieved even a part of that through my actions and
through the various roles I have been entrusted with, I consider myself
successful in living up to the expectations of this great visionary of India.
fter India conducted the second nuclear test at Pokhran in 1998, in whose
development I played a part, I was given various epithets. The one that has
stayed with me even after so many years and beyond the years of my presidency
is Missile Man. It amuses me vastly when I hear myself being called that, for it
sounds more the name for a child's action figure than of a man of science that I
believe myself to be. Yet, it also carries all the love and respect that has been
showered on me by so many in this country. To me it also symbolizes some sort
of culmination of my journey into the realm of science, rocketry and
engineering. The beginning of this journey stretches a long way back into time -
so long that when I think back I wonder if it all happened to me, or is it some
story that I myself read in a book somewhere? But of course, all that went into
making me a person who chose the path of science really did happen, and
remembering it now is like taking a journey upriver - from the delta to the
source, further and further upstream I drift, till I reach the point when I was still
a boy, trying to find my path in life.
In many ways my real education began after I left Rameswaram for high
school at Ramanathapuram. As I have written earlier, it was the first time I
stepped out of the protective embrace of Rameswaram, my mother and
everything else that was familiar. I was very much a shy small-town boy then,
afraid to speak out much. It was at Schwartz High School that I had my first
brush with the wonders of science, and had it explained to me in a manner that
set my mind alight. At that school there was a teacher called Reverend Iyadurai
Solomon. He struck up a relationship of great openness and trust with me. In
him, I found the guide that I needed to show me the path forward.
I was fascinated by the flight of birds in the sky. I could watch them for
hours, looking at their flight patterns and paths in the skies above me. The desire
to fly and be one among them had grown within me from a young age. One day,
while studying the physics of flight, Reverend Iyadurai Solomon took a bunch of
us students to the seashore. There he pointed out the birds, and standing by the
sea, with the roar of the waves in our ears, the harsh cries of cranes and seagulls
as they soared around us, he opened up a new world of aerodynamics,
aeronautical design and jet-streams and airflows to us. I was one among a group
of fifteen year olds, and for me, it was perhaps the most important lesson in
science till then. Suddenly, what for me till then had been a matter of fascination,
was now explained and made clear. It was as though I had been looking out from
behind a cloudy glass window. Now the window had been thrown open and I
was looking out into the world with wide-open eyes, thirsting to know more.
As I made my way through school and then into college at St Joseph's,
Tiruchirapalli, there were many more such moments lying in wait for me. I had
realized early on that I needed to keep my mind and ears open, my brain
sharpened and focused and there was nothing that I could not learn or absorb if it
came my way. At St Joseph's, when introduced to the concept of subatomic
physics by Professor Chinnadurai and Professor Krishnamurthy, I started
thinking for the first time about the hidden world of matter and decay that is
present all around us. I learnt about half-life periods and the radioactive decay of
substances, and suddenly, the world seemed a lot different from the solid
certainties that had formed it earlier. I also got thinking about the so-called
dualities of science and spirituality. Were they really all that different from each
other as they were made out to be? If at a subatomic level particles can become
unstable and disintegrate, how far was it removed from the state of all human
life? Science sought to provide answers to all natural phenomena, and
spirituality helped us understand our place in the entire scheme of the universe.
While one looked at it through the solid certainties of mathematics and formulae,
spirituality did so by opening up the mind and heart to experiences and by going
deeper within one's own self. Hazily, it started getting apparent to me that the
connections between what was becoming my world and the one my father
inhabited were not that far removed from one another.
From Tiruchirapalli I went to MIT to study aeronautical engineering. Here,
the sight of two decommissioned aircraft reignited my desire to know everything
about the fascinating world of human flight. I was drawn towards them like a
moth to a flame and realized there was no career possible for me that did not
take me into the realm of these man-made flying objects. At MIT, three teachers
shaped this desire and took it from a wish to the path of reality. They were
Professor Sponder, an Austrian who taught me technical aerodynamics,
Professor K. A. V. Pandalai, who taught aero-structure design and analysis, and
Professor Narasingha Rao, who taught us theoretical aerodynamics.
These three teachers showed me just how fascinating a subject aeronautics is.
What we perceive as movement and flow is broken down into components that
explain how and why objects move in the air. I lost myself in exploring the
complex world of fluid dynamics, modes of motion, shock waves, shock-wave
drag and more. At the same time the structural features of aeroplanes became
clearer to me, and I studied with infinite gusto all about biplanes, monoplanes,
tailless planes and many other such areas of study.
There were many moments that occurred while I was at MIT when I found
myself avidly exploring the world of science. All this was happening at a period
in the country's history when, starting from the prime minister himself -
Jawaharlal Nehru - great emphasis was being laid on the development of the
scientific temperament. All around me, especially in an educational institution
like ours, I observed that we were being encouraged to leave behind traditional
ways of thinking and embrace this new climate. It was best if we used scientific
methods in the pursuit of knowledge. Brought up as I was steeped in the
religious climate of Rameswaram, I found this very difficult to do. Instead, I
found myself giving shape to my earlier glimmerings of the essential oneness of
science and spirituality. I could not make myself acknowledge that sensory
perceptions were the only source of knowledge and truth. I had been brought up
with the lesson that true reality lay beyond the material world, in the spiritual
realm, and that true knowledge lay in exploring the inner self. Now, I was
becoming more and more a part of another world - where proofs and
experiments and formulae held sway. Gradually I learnt to work out my own
stand on this, though it took many years to crystallize.
Finally, I emerged from the portals of MIT a certified engineer, yet I still had
to learn a lot about the world of rockets and missiles that were going to be where
my career lay in the future. All I knew then was that a great big world lay open
for me to explore, and I was determined to do as much of it from high up, way
up in the skies.
After some years at the DTD&P (Air) where I was part of various teams that
designed and built systems ranging from a vertical landing and take-off platform
to what was termed a Hot Cockpit, I found myself at the Aeronautical
Development Establishment (ADE) in Bangalore. It was here, I realize now, that
I had my first big opportunity at innovation and learning to build something
from scratch - this was to become a recurring pattern in my career. At ADE,
based on my preliminary studies on ground-handling equipment, it was decided
that an indigenous hovercraft prototype should be designed and developed as a
Ground Equipment Machine (GEM). The director of ADE, Dr Mediratta, put
together a small team of four, and told me to head it.
It was a massive challenge for us. There was neither much literature on it,
nor a person who was experienced in this sort of technology whom we could
turn to for advice. There were no pre-existing designs or standard components
that we could use. In fact, there was nothing much the team had going for it,
other than knowing that we had to build a successful flying machine. It was an
astounding challenge, I think now, for a group of engineers who had not built a
machine ever, leave alone a flying one. We were given three years to complete
the project, and we spent the first few months simply floundering, trying to find
our feet. Then at one point I decided that we just needed to go ahead with the
available hardware and take things as they came. Despite the huge challenge, it
was also a project right after my heart and fired my imagination too. We moved
from the design process into development after a few months.
By now, I was a much more assertive and confident individual, yet my small-
town middle-class roots could never leave my soul. Pushed into a world where
one needed to direct the work of others while facing the questions and doubts of
senior colleagues, it had the same effect on me as an iron that has been forged in
fire. People like me, who are intrinsically shy, with the added quality of coming
from a different background than my city-bred colleagues, tend to remain hidden
in the shadows unless something or someone pushes us centre stage. I
understood that I had got that push and was determined to use all my knowledge
and ingenuity to make the hovercraft project a success. There were many within
the organization who questioned the relevance of the project - of the amount of
time and money it was using up. They questioned my role in it, too. But my team
and I just put our heads down and continued to work. Slowly, stage-by-stage, the
prototype started to take shape. As had once happened when Professor
Srinivasan rejected my design work at MIT and I redid my entire work in the
span of two nights, I again found now that the mind is unbelievably elastic. It
can expand as much as you let it, and once it opens up, there are no barriers - the
belief in yourself that comes as a result is something no one can take away from
The project was christened Nandi, and had the blessings of the then defence
minister, V.K. Krishna Menon. He firmly believed that this was the beginning of
the development of defence equipment in India. He keenly followed our work
and after one year, when he inspected the progress we had made, he told Dr
Mediratta that Kalam and his team are sure to succeed.
Indeed, we did succeed. Before our three years were up, we produced a fully
working prototype and were ready to show it to the minister. Krishna Menon
flew in the Nandi and I piloted it - though his security detail would have wished
otherwise - and I realized for the first time the sheer joy and exhilaration of
creating something, based on our knowledge and teamwork, that was a first for
the country. Unfortunately, the story of Nandi does not have a happy ending.
Once Krishna Menon was out of office, his successors did not share his
optimism about the use of the hovercraft. It became a controversial subject and
was finally shelved. If anything could bring me down to earth and show me that
sometimes the sky was not the limit, it was this rude lesson - that often there are
powers greater than yours who dictate the consequences of your work. My other
lesson was that while there are areas that I cannot influence, I can certainly do
my work to the best and to the most of my abilities, as finally that is all that
remains in one's hands. And who knows just where the consequences of our
actions lie? While I was still trying to recover from the disappointment of Nandi
not being put to the use for which it was created, a chain of events led Professor
M.G.K. Menon of TIFR to come see it and question me about it. This finally
ended with me going to work for INCOSPAR as a rocket engineer, under the
direction of Dr Vikram Sarabhai.
After I went to work at INCOSPAR and then ISRO, I was entrusted with the
development of various types of rockets and space vehicles, ranging from
sounding rockets to rocket payloads to satellite launch vehicles. It was Dr
Sarabhai's vision to develop India's space programme as one where various
developmental work happened concurrently, and I was fortunate to be a part of a
number of such projects. However, the one that I regard as my most complex
challenge has to be the development of the SLV. I was leading a mammoth
project of developing a launch vehicle that would put satellites into orbit. It had
the potential to not only enhance our position as a technology-driven nation, it
would also generate revenues for us by providing launch facilities to other
countries who wished to use the SLV to put their satellites into orbit. I have
described in detail my journey in the building of SLV in my book,
It was an extraordinarily difficult journey on account of many factors. There
were the invariable complications that arise when a project of this size is
developed. We were given a budget - both in terms of time and resource - and it
was my responsibility to see that we achieved the result within that budget. It
was also a time of great personal stress for me. For within the space of three
years I lost three dear ones - Ahmed Jalalluddin, my father and my mother. It
was only by drowning myself in my work and keeping my mind firmly focused
on the end result that we needed to deliver that I was able to bring the project to
If I am asked now as to what were the biggest lessons I learnt in the
development of the SLV, I will say there are three aspects. There was the first
revelation to me about the role of science and technology, research and
engineering in the development of a country. In the number of teams that were
working on the SLV there were scientists, researchers and engineers. Who did
what and where - as a team leader, I was meant to draw lines and give direction.
I learnt that science is open-ended and exploratory. That it sets out to find
answers like a traveller goes on a voyage. It is, in fact, a voyage into all that is
possible and all that will one day be explained and made possible. Science is a
joy and passion. Development, on the other hand, is a closed loop. It takes the
work done by scientists and moves it a few steps further. It does not allow for
mistakes and exploration. In fact, it uses mistakes for making modifications and
upgradations. So where the scientists showed us the way and opened up
possibilities that enabled us to build an indigenously designed and developed
launch vehicle, the engineers kept us on the path of results, given the time and
resources we had on hand. For a project of this nature to succeed, it needed all
these parts to work in tandem and in sync, like the pieces of an orchestra.
The second lesson that came to me was about the nature of commitment. In
those years, while I myself thought of little else other than the project, there were
many others like me who put in tremendous amounts of hard work and passion
into it. Yet, more valuable words of wisdom on this were never said to me than
those by Wernher von Braun. A giant in the field of rocketry, von Braun had
developed the V-2 missiles that destroyed London during World War II. Later, he
was inducted into NASA's rocketry programme, where he created the Jupiter
missile that was the first missile with a high range. He was a scientist, designer,
engineer, administrator and a technology manager. He was, indeed, the father of
modern rocketry. I had the privilege of flying with him when he visited India,
when I received him at Chennai and escorted him to Thumba. His words to me
about the whole nature of our work are still ingrained in my mind. 'You should
always remember that we don't just build on successes, we also build on
failures.' On the inevitable hard work and dedication required by those in our
profession he said, 'Hard work is not enough in rocketry. It is not a sport where
mere hard work can fetch you honours. Here, not only do you have to have a
goal, but you also need strategies to achieve it as fast as possible.
'Total commitment is not just hard work, it is total involvement. It is also
about setting a goal. It is having a goal in front of you that makes a difference to
the final outcome of your hard work.' And these words, that I believe I did
follow: 'Do not make rocketry your profession, your livelihood - make it your
religion, your mission.' At that time in life I put everything other than the SLV
project on hold. I also learnt to manage stress. It is the way your mind handles
the difficulties that are strewn in the path of your goal that determines the result.
I truly believe we need these difficulties in order to enjoy the final success of any
And this leads on to my third lesson from the SLV project - the ability to
deal with setbacks and learn from them. It is now well known that the first
experimental flight trial of the SLV-3 ended in disaster - the vehicle plunged into
the sea. Stage 1 performed perfectly. It was at the second stage that things went
out of control. The flight was terminated after 317 seconds and the vehicle's
remains, including the fourth stage with the payload, splashed into the sea, 560
I was numbed beyond belief at the turn of events. Yes, I had experienced
failures and setbacks earlier, but this, coming at the end of years of back-
breaking hard work, was difficult to absorb. I had no answers as the thought kept
racing round and round in my head - 'What went wrong?' I was at the end of my
physical capabilities as I had been putting up with enormous stress and now,
when all of it had come to nought, there was nothing I could say to myself or to
those around me that made any sense. Finally, all I could think of was sleep. I
had to sleep, I told myself, before I could go any further on this path of analysis.
I remember I must have slept for many hours, and was awoken gently by Dr
Brahm Prakash. He was then my boss, but at the time he came to me only as an
elder, with concern. He woke me up and made me accompany him to the mess
for a meal. We ate together and all the time he gave me solace by not uttering a
single word about the launch. The analysis and the rebuilding of the mission
would come later. At that moment in time we were just two men, tired beyond
belief, yet knowing that what we had created would not come to waste. We knew
we had more mountains to climb and higher peaks to conquer in the days to
come, but right then he took me under his wings and did what a parent would do
to a child after he has lost that coveted race - give him food, let him rest and let
him think where the next step lies.
And that was perhaps the most important lesson I learnt from SLV-3. That
humaneness, generosity and understanding can never let you down. At the end of
the day, when goals have been set and mapped, when the path has been traversed
and obstacles met head on, it is only the values of humanity that will bring true
succour. To be able to be gentle and forgiving, compassionate and kind are
finally all we need to be in times to come, whether we develop missiles or teach
in a school; whether we hold high offices or are parents bringing up children in
this confusing world of ours.
My journey into the world of science goes on much further from here - from
ISRO I moved to DRDO, where I was part of the teams that built India's first
indigenous missile systems - the Prithvi, Trishul, Nag and Agni. How they were
built and the paths they led us on I have chronicled earlier too. While working on
them, not only did I understand and assimilate the knowledge about new areas of
science and rocketry, I also learnt to innovate, to lead more effectively, to
communicate and to absorb both setbacks and successes.
Why do I need to tell these stories? Perhaps because I feel that in the diverse
range of subjects and people I have dealt with, I have encountered almost every
aspect of life that can be bewildering. I worked my way through them, and if in
my recounting I can help others in similar situations understand the vagaries of
life, then I will believe that this journey of mine has been lived not just for me
but for countless others too.

I am a well in this great land
Looking at its millions of boys and girls
To draw from me
And spread His grace everywhere
As does the water drawn from a well.
his clutch of stories consists of little vignettes of my life that touch upon
moments and people, time and places that have left a deep impact upon me.
Needless to say, when one begins to remember and recount such moments from
one's life - and if it has been as full and busy as mine - there are hundreds more
that can be told. In my mind, my years as the scientific adviser to the
Government of India when India conducted its second nuclear test, my
retirement and dedication to teaching thereafter and my years as the President of
India, all hold stories of innumerable challenges and learning.
As I stepped further and further into the glare of the media with the launch of
Agni and subsequent events, I had to draw from the lessons I learnt early in life
to deal with all sorts of decisions and conundrums. My priorities and aims also
underwent subtle changes. Whereas earlier I was involved more with
implementing and doing, now I entered a more reflective period when I spent
time thinking, writing and talking with people from all walks of life. As the
years went by, I found that my great interest now lay in interacting more and
more with the youth of the country. I went on to write a number of books which
were successful, perhaps because the readers recognized them to be mission
statements of a man who saw a certain vision of India for the year 2020, and
who was trying to work on the vision and articulate it to the country at the same
time. My work on my books,
India 2020, Wings of Fire, Ignited Minds
others have been deeply satisfying for the great enthusiasm with which they
were received by the reading public of the country.
While I expressed my vision and dream for the country through my lectures,
interactions, articles and books, I also became interested in many other areas of
technology. I had the unique experience in the 1990s of helping to formulate the
India Vision 2020 strategies. I was given the task of chairing the Technology
Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC). In the first meeting
of the council itself we took a decision that TIFAC must evolve a plan on how
India can be transformed into an economically developed nation by the year
2020. At a time when the economy was growing at around 5 to 6 per cent per
annum in GDP, we had to envisage a growth rate of at least 10 per cent per
annum consistently for over ten years if the development vision of a billion
people was to be fulfilled. This task really ignited the minds of all of us in the
council. We debated and arrived at seventeen task teams with over 500 members,
who had consultations with over 5,000 people in various sectors of the economy.
Committees worked for over two years, resulting in twenty-five reports that we
presented to the then prime minister of India on 2 August 1996. This is an
excellent example of how different departments and organizations worked in an
integrated way for national development. While our work at TIFAC was
progressing, I also studied what was being done in the fields of agriculture and
information technology with a lot of interest, and that became an abiding passion
for me. As I travelled all over the country meeting students and teachers,
administrators and officials, I understood that working on a vision was only the
first part of my work. Only when one can express the mission, explain it and
debate about it does the vision acquire life. I decided to do just that by talking to
people wherever I went, about the need to make India a knowledge-based
society, a country where technology brings empowerment, yet at the same time
we continue to acknowledge and develop our spiritual dimensions.
My term as the President of India, from 2002 to 2007, I now look back on as
one long lesson in understanding the wonder that is India. The media gave me
the name People's President, which was picked up by many across the country.
And I must say I was happy to be referred to as such. When I started my tenure, I
was very sure that I intended to spend as much time as possible touring this
endlessly complex and fascinating country that is ours. I wanted to see how
people lived in different parts, the environment that formed their lives, what their
problems are and how these were being solved - or were they being solved at all.
It was said that as President of the country, I toured it more than perhaps any
other before me. From the slopes of Siachen to the beautiful northeastern states,
from the far western regions of the country to the deep south, I went almost
everywhere except Lakshwadeep (which will remain a regret). I travelled by
road, by air and even by rail on three occasions, when the old presidential
railway carriage was refurbished and upgraded with modern facilities like
satellite mapping, and I have to say I saw the country from all kinds of angles,
for which I will be eternally grateful.
What did I learn from the hundreds, no, millions of men, women and
children that I met in these years? I learnt that as a society we are trained to not
question the status quo. It requires a lot of coaxing and encouragement to make
even the young people I met in schools to open up and ask their questions. At the
same time, this does not mean that the questions are not there. They are waiting,
bubbling at the surface. Once the gates are opened, the dams burst forth with
eagerness and inquisitiveness. I have been asked questions on science,
technology, space, the arts and I have been asked questions on why I have
remained a bachelor and why I wear my hair the way I do! To each question I
tried to give an answer - one that was well thought out, sincere and as detailed
as possible. I also told them that I myself am still very much a seeker. I came to
them as much to speak and debate as to seek the answers that I was looking for
myself. I understood then what it means to be an Indian, what it means to be a
man or a woman in this country, how each one of us shapes the society while we
each live our lives, and what can one do with this understanding.
The years of my presidency also had its share of political upheavals, which I
have written about in my last book,
. As the constitutional head of
the country, I became intricately involved in the democratic process. The way
Parliament and other institutions functioned, and how the President can bring
about changes in the areas of his influence were thoughts that preoccupied a lot
After my term as President was over, I happily returned to my earlier life of
teaching and lecturing that took me all over the country and abroad. If possible, I
was perhaps as busy, if not more, as I worked tirelessly to push my favourite
projects, India 2020 and Providing Urban Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA). I
have continued to meet students, pursued research in universities in India and
abroad, and contributed my views on national issues. I visit remote areas in order
to talk to students there and give them a larger vision for their future. They often
question me on many things - from what subjects they should study in the higher
classes to infrastructural issues in their towns and districts.
This book, however, is not meant to be a linear account of my life. I have
done that earlier. This little book is like a resting place on a long and winding
road. It is that spot you spy on the highway where you veer away from the
onrushing traffic to stop and watch the rest of the world pass by while you mull
over the journey you have taken so far. It is perhaps a little stop on the train that
I took from Madras to Dehra Dun once upon a time, when I saw the country
from the southern tip to the northern reaches for the first time. This time,
however, my eyes are not focused on the destination alone. I can turn back and
wonder at the magical beginning of life - I can see my father walking home with
his coconuts, his mind alight with prayer; I can follow the movements of my
mother's hands as she prepares the chutneys and sambar and rice for the day for
us and as she beckons me to come sit by her on the kitchen floor; I can close my
eyes and hear the roar of waves and the crashing of the wind against the trees as
the cyclones strike Rameswaram; I can still feel the tiredness in my legs and
arms after a day that began and ended with delivering newspapers and then
collecting the money for them. I can also hear voices and words as clearly as
though they were spoken yesterday. I can hear my father tell me, 'I know you
have to go away to grow. Does the seagull not fly across the sun, alone and
without a nest? You must forego your longing for the land of your memories to
move into the dwelling place of your greater desires; our love will not bind you,
nor will our needs hold you.'
At this restful spot I can stop and wait for my co-travellers to walk by me
one more time. From Pakshi Lakshmana Sastrygal, Reverend Iyadurai Solomon,
Ahmed Jalalluddin to Dr Vikram Sarabhai, Professor Satish Dhawan and Dr
Brahm Prakash, I think of many others like them who deeply influenced me,
moulded and shaped my thoughts and intellect. While telling their stories, their
presence has become more deeply felt than ever before for me. The germination
of thoughts planted in my soul by these people has continued years after they left
my side. When I have shared these with you, my reader, I hope some seeds have
been planted in your minds too, the way they once came to me. This transfer of
thoughts and ideas, ideals and principles is a part of the circle that is life.
Hard work and piety, study and learning, compassion and forgiveness - these
have been the cornerstones of my life. I have now shared with the world the
roots of these features. In fact, any life that has been lived to the full, when
talked about with others, is a treasure house of thoughts and feelings that add
lustre to the wonder that is life. In the process, if they also give my readers wings
and help them to fire their dreams, I believe I would have played my small part
in the scheme of life that destiny placed me in.

is indeed an account of a life full of events. For nearly twenty-two
years, my friend, Harry Sheridon, has been with me and become part of many
events as they unfolded. With me, he has seen many happy times as well as those
filled with problems. Through thick and thin, Sheridon has always been with me
and has been of great assistance in whatever I do. May God bless him and his
family. I would like to thank Sudeshna Shome Ghosh of Rupa Publications, who
was with me from conception, design to the shaping of the book. She has been
following up continuously, with perseverance, in bringing it out. I greet her for

1Dr Kalam Presents His Book 'Transcendence' to Pramukh Swami Maharaj
20 June 2015, Sarangpur
July-August 2015 Annual Subscription `80/-

DR KALAM'S VISIT TO SARANGPUR
Top: Dr Kalam greets Swamishri prior to presenting his book.
Bottom: Dr Kalam addresses (inset) sadhus and several thousand
BAPS youths from throughout Gujarat in the Yagnapurush Sabhagruh.

In April 1978, Pramukh Swami Maharaj inspired and inaugurated
the first issue of Swaminarayan Bliss in Ahmedabad, Gujarat. The
bi-monthly magazine serves to enlighten BAPS youths, seniors and
well-wishers about the glory of Bhagwan Swaminarayan, the Akshar-
Purushottam philosophy and the Gunatit guru parampara . It also
seeks to inspire the universal values and traditions of Hinduism to
pursue a happy and peaceful life by serving God and humankind.
Founder: HDH Pramukh Swami Maharaj
Contributors: Sadhu Vivekjivandas, Sadhu Amrutvijaydas
Published & Printed by: Swaminarayan Aksharpith,
Shahibaug, Ahmedabad - 380004. India
Outside India (By Air Mail) India
Rupees Pounds US Dollars Rupees
1 Year 630 9 14 80
2 Years 1300 18 28 150
3 Years 1900 27 42 220
AKSHARPITH4 Fir st Word
5 V aidyaraj from Vadodara
8 Dr AP J Abdul Kalam Presents
'Transcendence' to Pramukh Swami
19 Addr ess to BAPS Youths
25 T ranscendence: My Spiritual
Experiences with Pramukh Swamiji
31 Celebr ating 'Transcendence'40 T ranscendence, 'A Historic Book'
43 Media Co verage
49 Sa tsang and Life as a Pilot
50 Pujy a Mahant Swami's Satsang Vicharan
54 Pr amukh Swami Maharaj's Vicharan
56 B APS News
3July-August 2015 Vol. 38 No. 4CONTENTSDr Abdul Kalam reads an extract from his book
'Transcendence' to Pramukh Swami Maharaj in
Sarangpur, 20 June 2015SPECIAL ISSUE
J ohannes Gutenberg (c. 1398-1468) was a German blacksmith who invented the first printing
press. His epoch-making invention ushered in the printing revolution, which is regarded as
one of the most important developments in the Renaissance period. Till the advent of the printing press the dissemination of knowledge had been limited to verbal means and handwritten scrolls.
The interest in books and dailies grew rapidly as writers and publishers mushroomed, catering
to the imagination, and thirst for knowledge and information among the masses. But today, there
is a burgeoning inclination that reading books has little importance and appeal in life compared
to other exciting and lucrative activities. Books are considered to be lifeless and reserved for
desks, cupboards, school and university libraries and monasteries. Furthermore, social media
and other means of communication have further diluted interest in reading.
But there is evidence, all through human history, of the impact of books on society, for better
and for worse. For instance, Hitler's Mein Kampf (My Struggle) became the political bible for
the German people, expounding that the German race was superior and the strongest in the world, and that it should rule over the the inferior races of the earth. It thus sowed hatred for
and triggered war against the Jews and others.
Albert Einstein's paper on relativity in 1905 mentioned the formula E=mc
2, which led to the
invention and deployment of nuclear bombs in 1945. Later, the formula also had its positive applications in harnessing nuclear power for producing energy.
Harriet Beecher Stowe's Uncle Tom's Cabin, a story about slavery in 18th century America,
led to the American Civil War and the subsequent abolishment of slavery.
Henry David Thoreau's work, Civil Disobedience , inspired Mohandas K. Gandhi to successfully
introduce satyagrah , non-cooperation and ahimsa for India's independence from British rule.
The Bhagavad Gita by Veda Vyas has brought solace to millions of restless and depressed
souls. Shri Krishna's message of karma yoga, raj yoga and bhakti yoga to Arjun forever provides
a panacea to a wide range of human issues. Similarly, the Vachanamrut, the spiritual discourses of Bhagwan Swaminarayan, provides inspiration, guidance and solutions to countless spiritual
aspirants. It contains the essence of the Upanishads, Gita and Purans, and other principles
propagated by Bhagwan Swaminaryan.
Many other books in the fields of philosophy, religion, literature and education have also
influenced and shaped the lives of people all over the world.
Dr APJ Abdul Kalam's recent book, T ranscendence , describes his spiritual experiences with
Pramukh Swami Maharaj. The book, published by HarperCollins India, also includes the social
and moral contributions of BAPS to society, the co-relation of science and spirituality and crea-
tive leadership. The book also discusses higher values, hard work, progress, peace and happiness,
which are the urgent needs of humanity today.
This issue of Swaminarayan Bliss deals with Dr Kalam's presentation of his book to Pramukh
Swami Maharaj and his address to youths in Sarangpur, a brief overview of the contents of the book and the grand celebration in Ahmedabad to commemorate the book's public release on
28 June 2015. u
4 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 5
SWAMINARAYAN HISTORY: Translation by Sadhu Vivekjivandas
In Gadhada Shriji Maharaj expounded
about the true understanding of his form
and the glory of his ideal Sadhu. The au -
dience of devotees had faith mainly in the non-manifest form of God or his ideal Sadhu, and so
they found it difficult to grasp the glory of Maharaj
as God and Aksharbrahman Gunatitanand Swami as his ideal devotee. For that, the mind ( man) and
intellect (buddhi) thwart one from realizing them.
The mind reasons and questions in umpteen ways,
whereas the intellect accepts only that which it
has decided upon. That was why Bhagwan Shri
Krishna exhorted Arjun, " Sarvadharm n paritya -
jya m mekam sharanam vraja" - meaning "You
give up the dharma of your mind and take refuge in me alone". Thus, such unwillingness to understand
and do is a longstanding hurdle for aspirants and others. Ironically, one has innate faith in the non-
manifest form of God, but not so in his manifest
form. The principle reason being their manifesta -
tion in human form, because when Bhagwan and
his Sadhu show human traits the aspirant begins to
doubt and question their divinity. But the libera-
tion of one's soul lies in realizing the knowledge of and association with the manifest form of God.
Shri Hari celebrated the Fuldol festival. He showered the colours sanctified before the murti
of Vasudev Narayan on all, and played ras with
the devotees and sadhus. Shri Hari soaked Jiva
Khachar, Mulu Khachar, Dada Khachar and other
devotees with coloured water and pleased them. In conclusion, everyone proceeded to the river
Ghela for a bath. Thereafter Maharaj and his dis -
ciples headed towards the darbar of Jiva Khachar,
singing kirtans along the way. Here, Jiva Khachar
and his son, Mulu Khachar, performed pujan of
Shri Hari and offered him a garland of sugar crys -
tals. Subsequently, Maharaj went to the darbar of
Dada Khachar and his relatives performed
pujan of Shri Hari and also offered him garlands
made of sugar crystals. Then they offered dates and
popcorn to Maharaj. Amariba and Amulaba, the
daughters of Jiva Khachar, had also accompanied
Maharaj to Dada's darbar. They, too, along with
Jivuba, Laduba and others performed pujan of
Maharaj. Both the sisters, Amariba and Amulaba,
had renounced their husbands to dedicate them -
selves to performing devotion to Maharaj. They
were very close to both Jivuba and Laduba.
The following day Dada Khachar sponsored
lunch for all. All the female members of Dada
Khachar's family helped in cooking the meals.
Everyone wished to host Maharaj in Gadhpur for
an indefinite time. Hence, each day, one devotee after another sponsored lunch. Shri Hari accepted
While Shri Hari was in Gadhada a royal vaidya
from Vadodara arrived. He started narrating
about how he had come to the satsang-fold for

6 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
ROYAL VAIDYA OF VADODARA COMES TO
Shriji Maharaj decided to celebrate the Hari
Jayanti festival in Gadhpur. One day the royal
vaidya of Vadodara, Ramchandra, arrived. Since
he had never set foot in this region no one knew
him or had heard of him before. However, he had an impressive personality. He came to Maharaj, who welcomed him warmly, "Please come. Where
have you arrived from in this scorching heat?"
The vaidyaraj became enamoured of Maharaj's
face, because he felt him to be transcendental.
He instantly realized that Maharaj was not like
other humans. He humbly introduced himself,
"Maharaj, I come from Vadodara. I am the royal
vaidya of King Gaekwad." Before he could say
anything more Maharaj asked, "Did Gopalanand
Swami send you here?"
"No Maharaj. I am unaware of your new sam-
pradaya. A few years ago a scriptural debate had
taken place in Vadodara, and there had been a lot
of fanfare. But since I was disinclined towards any new sampradaya by virtue of my faith in Bhagwan
Ranchhodrai of Dakor I did not attend or ac -
quaint myself about it. Furthermore, because of
my association with the Diwan of Vadodara I had
developed an aversion for your sampradaya."
"Then why have you come here all the way
from Vadodara in this heat?" asked Maharaj.
The royal vaidya could not look straight into
Maharaj's eyes. He looked down and replied
abashedly, "My Lord, I regularly visit Dakor for
Ranchhodrai's darshan on every full moon day. This has been my routine for years. I also perform
seva there according to my means. But during
one visit to Dakor I witnessed an immoral act in
the mandir premises. Ever since, my mind has
remained distraught. I started repenting, thinking
that years have flitted by in devotion and my life
will soon come to an end, but if I fail to achieve
moksha in this life then it will be futile."
Shri Hari avidly listened to his words and
pacified him, "One who is genuinely inclined spiritually can aspire for moksha and make one's
Then Maharaj enquired, "What hap -
MEETING A SWAMINARAYAN SADHU
The vaidyaraj continued, "My Lord, the pos-
sibility of not being able to achieve moksha in this
lifetime started bugging me. I spent restless nights.
But one night I heard a voice, 'The Swaminarayan sadhus are in Ahmedabad, go to them.' I looked around, trying to locate the source of the voice.
There was no one around, but I still kept hear -
ing the same words again and again. Then I felt
it could be the voice of the Divine within me. I
felt pacified by the voice and slept well that night.
The next day I came to Ahmedabad. Here, I had darshan of your scholarly paramhansa, Nityanand
Swami. On seeing him I felt inner peace. I can -
didly revealed everything to him. He replied,
'Shriji Maharaj has inspired you to come here.
Presently, he is in Gadhpur. You should go there.' Thus I have come here with the resolve to take
Muktanand Swami and Brahmanand Swami
were seated before Shri Hari. Muktanand Swami
recalled, "Maharaj, I had heard the name of the vaidyaraj when I was in Vadodara. People spoke
greatly about him as a vaidya, but I had not
The vaidyaraj, Ramchandrabhai, confessed
humbly, "Swami, I may be an expert in matters
of ayurveda but I am ignorant in spiritual knowl -
edge. I have spent all these years in vain. You came
to Vadodara yet I was not able to come for your
darshan. I had also heard about the illustrious personality of Nityanand Swami and Gopalanand
Swami, but I was not fortunate enough to come
for their darshan either."
Shriji Maharaj reassured him, "Don't be dis-
mayed. Gopalanand Swami is coming here for
the Hari Jayanti festival."
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 7
VAIDYARAJ FINDS THE PATH OF MOKSHA
Shri Hari blessed the vaidyaraj by placing his
hands on his head. The divine touch gave him an
inner vision of divine knowledge. He perceived
divinity in the form of Shriji Maharaj and realized the truth of the voice he had first heard and the words of Nityanand Swami. He felt immensely
fortunate and convinced that he had found the
path to moksha .
He requested Maharaj, "Please allow me to
sponsor a meal tomorrow." Maharaj advised him,
"Do so after two days when Gopalanand Swami arrives. Till then stay here and take the benefit of darshan and discourses." The vaidyaraj was
happy with Maharaj's proposal.
When Gopalanand Swami arrived, the vaid-
yaraj sponsored the meal. Shri Hari called the
vaidyaraj to sit besides him and have his meal.
Maharaj introduced Gopalanand Swami and
told the vaidyaraj to go to him on a regular
basis in Vadodara. Thereafter, Shri Hari permit -
ted him to leave for Vadodara the next day so
that he could resume his services to his peo -
ple. The next day Maharaj sent Bhajananand
Swami and Jayanand Varni to accompany him
to Vadodara. He also gave the vaidyaraj a cloth
with the graphic print of Nar-Narayan Dev for
daily worship. The vaidyaraj felt exhilarated
about his association with Maharaj. He pros -
trated to him and beseeched for his blessings before leaving for Vadodara.
KATHA OF MOKSHA DHARMA
The next day Maharaj told Pragji Dave to read
the Moksha Dharma (a chapter from the Shrimad Bhagvat). During the katha Maharaj sometimes
elaborated and also revealed its subtle meanings.
Both Gopalanand Swami and Nityanand Swami
realized that the shastras cannot be fully under -
stood through one's scholarliness alone. For that
one requires the association and grace of God or
a God-realized Sadhu.WHICH IS YOUR UNIQUE VIRTUE
Once, Shriji Maharaj wished to inform the
devotees about the uniqueness of his paramhan-
sas. He asked the senior paramhansas during an
assembly, "You are all adept in many aspects of
saintliness and in external matters. Reveal your unique talents so that I can engage you in specific
The paramhansas looked at each other with
reluctance and remained silent. In response, Shri
Hari stated, "Since I have asked you I expect you
to reply. Don't take it to be self-praise when you speak about your virtues."
The first to reveal was Muktanand Swami. He
said, "Maharaj, no matter how angry a person
may be, but if I were to go to him his anger would subside instantly."
Shri Hari smiled appreciatingly and con -
firmed, "Swami, your saintliness is such that any -
one who has your darshan will become pacified
and blissful. I have been witnessing this since the
time of Ramanand Swami. That is why everyone in Satsang considers you to be compassionate like
a mother. Other than that tell us about another
Muktanand Swami became perplexed. He
felt it improper to reveal his virtues before Shri
Hari, and thus remained quiet. Shri Hari prod -
ded him, saying, "Swami, go ahead. Once you
have revealed your virtues I will enjoin you in
a corresponding seva. This will enable others to
benefit from your virtues."
Muktanand Swami thus looked down and
spoke, "Maharaj, no matter how stone-hearted
a person may be, but if he listens to my discourses
his heart will melt."
Shriji Maharaj endorsed Swami's words,
"What you have said is true. And that was how
the Jain baniyas of Ahmedabad understood the
crux of satsang." u
(Contd. in next issue)
Translated from Gujarati text of
Bhagwan Swaminarayan by Shri H.T . Dave
8 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
From their very first meeting on 30 June
2001, Dr APJ Abdul Kalam and Pramukh Swami
Maharaj struck an instant bond of friendship and
On that day, after meeting Swamishri, Dr
Kalam told the sadhus about Saint Thiruvalluvar's
teaching that when you are burdened by some
troubling worries, sitting in the presence of a great
divinity will free you of those worries. Then he
revealed that he had experienced such a feeling in
the presence of Pramukh Swami Maharaj.
Between 2001 and 2014, Dr Kalam met
Pramukh Swami Maharaj seven times in person
and spoke to him on numerous occasions by phone. All these interactions with Swamishri left a lasting impression on Dr Kalam. He was touched by Swamishri's profound spirituality and divinity.
So, to record his feelings he decided to write a
book about his spiritual experiences of Pramukh
Swami Maharaj. Dr Kalam, with co-author Prof.
Arun Tiwari, spent two years writing the book.
They titled the book T ranscendence to reflect their
belief that Pramukh Swami Maharaj is beyond the three gunas and beyond this world.
With the book printed and ready for public
sale, Dr Kalam deeply wished to present the first
copy to Pramukh Swami Maharaj in Sarangpur
and meet him for the eighth time. Dr Kalam is
himself 84 years old and has a very busy schedule, Dr APJ Abdul Kalam
20 June 2015, Sarangpur

July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 9
yet he was determined to personally hand the first
copy to Pramukh Swami Maharaj.
While planning for his visit, Dr Kalam firmly
insisted that he would make the journey from
Ahmedabad to Sarangpur by car. He was request -
ed many times to travel by helicopter since there were many roadworks in progress along the route
which would make the journey longer and un -
comfortable. However, he flatly refused to travel by helicopter explaining that, for him, this was
a pilgrimage. It was with such deep feelings that
Dr Kalam undertook the journey and arrived in
Sarangpur at around 12.15 p.m. on 20 June 2015.BOOK PRESENTATION TO PRAMUKH SWAMI
Swamishri's former meeting hall was decorated
and set up for the private presentation ceremony
to celebrate the occasion. There, Swamishri wel-
comed Dr Kalam, Prof. Tiwari (co-author), Shri
P .M. Sukumar (CEO, HarperCollins India) and a select group of Dr Kalam's associates. The sad-
guru sadhus were also present: Pujya Dr Swami, Pujya Bhaktipriya (Kothari) Swami, Pujya T yag-vallabh Swami, Pujya Ishwarcharan Swami and Pujya Viveksagar Swami.
First, Swamishri garlanded Dr Kalam, softly
saying, "I am pleased. Thank you for coming Dr Abdul Kalam reads a passage from 'Transcendence' to Pramukh Swami Maharaj
10 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015from so far." Then, Dr Kalam took his seat next
to Swamishri and firmly holding Swamishri's
hand, he said, "Maha Pramukh Swamiji, for me
it's 15 years travel. Beautiful spiritual journey.
When Akshardham was inaugurated in New
Delhi, it was a beautiful sight. All leaders were
there. Everybody talked. You said this is God's creation. That is the great day I decided that we
must write a book. Your life's a great life. And we have brought it out in the book. The great life.
Purposeful life. Divine life."
After this, Dr Kalam first offered the book to
Shri Harikrishna Maharaj and then presented the
first copy of T ranscendence to Swamishri, to the
chanting of Vedic verses. While presenting the book, Dr Kalam said, "I have written Maha
Pramukh Swamiji. Revered spiritual teacher. My
respects. 20.6.2015. Sarangpur." Then Dr Kalam said, "I have written this book. You are a great teacher. You are a great teacher I learnt to re -
move I, remove me. That's a great lesson I have
learnt. Remove I and mine. I learnt from you."
Swamishri said, "To rise above I and mine is only
possible by God's grace. It is the best principle by
which to remain happy in life."
After the presentation, Dr Kalam sat down
and prepared to read a passage from the book to
Swamishri. He began, "This is T ranscendence "
Then, he continued, "It was a hot summer's evening on 30th June 2001 when I met Pramukh
Swamiji for the first time. In saffron robes, the
gentle, fair complexion Pramukh Swamiji was ra -
diating divinity. That was the first thought that occurred to me upon seeing you. My friend Y.S.
Rajan was with me.
"We sat down and tried to adjust to Swamiji's
Dr Kalam greets Swamishri on arriving in the meeting hall
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 11powerful, gracious presence. So many people are
asking, 'What should be the next vision for India?
How do you transform a developing country into
a developed country within next 30 years?' I had
"But you gave a sixth idea. You said, the sixth
idea is spiritual life of India. Apart from pros -
perity and wealth, be sure to transform India
into a spiritual nation. I have added that. I was drawn to Pramukh Swamiji's simplicity. I felt as
if I had known him all my life; I was sitting in
the presence of my father, my great teacher; in a
Then, Dr Kalam called Prof. Arun Tiwari to
Prof. Tiwari said, "My challenge was what to
write. T wo oceans to fit into a small pot. I kept
a photo of Pramukh Swamiji in front of me and began typing, and this book was made."
Next, Shri P .M. Sukumar, CEO of Harper -
Collins India received Swamishri's blessings. He said to Swamishri, "We are delighted and hon -
oured to have been given an opportunity to pub-lish this book. Our first print run for this book is a
record 95,000. That is the highest we have done. And we are publishing in Gujarati and Hindi and
have licenced Malayalam rights, and we hope to do it in many other languages. And I'm very grate -
ful also because, since I've been involved with this book, a sort of divine grace seems to have
descended on my life as well."
Thereafter, Shri H. Sheridan, Executive Secre -
tary to Dr Kalam, was introduced to Swamishri
Then, Shri Ajay Umat, who is translating the
book into Gujarati, received Swamishri's blessings.
Dr Kalam garlands and honours Swamishri
12 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015Finally, Shri R.K. Prasad,
Personal Secretary to Dr
Kalam, and Shri D.S. Sharma,
Assistant Personal Secretary, received
After the introductions, Dr Kalam tied a na-
dachhadi to Swamishri's right wrist and said,
"This book took over 2 years of research. And
every page is about your life. And also my experi -
ences combined. So, by divine blessings we have written this book as a tribute to you. For you
for my great teacher as a tribute."
Then, Ishwarcharan Swami honoured Dr
Kalam by draping a shawl over his shoulders.
Swamishri then presented a beautiful peacock
made of precious stones and crystals, a tiger-stone
tasbi (rosary) and a special plaque commemorating
this historic occasion to Dr Kalam.Swamishri also presented a special plaque to
Prof. Tiwari and Shri P .M. Sukumar to acknowl -
edge their contributions to this project.
After the 30-minute presentation ceremony,
Dr Kalam accompanied Swamishri to his quarters.
There, Dr Kalam saw the elegant garden behind
Swamishri's room and commented, "The garden
is beautiful, godly and divine." The sadhus re-
minded him of his wish to walk with Swamishri in
the Moghul Gardens of the Rashtrapati Bhavan.
So, to fulfil this wish, he guided Swamishri's
wheelchair and walked a few steps. Swamishri
was pleased by his love and affection, and gently
thanked and blessed him for his visit.
Then, Dr Kalam returned to the meeting
hall and gave a brief interview. He was asked,
"What were your feelings when you were writ-
ing the book and what are your feelings now
Dr Kalam presents a signed copy of Transcendence to Swamishri
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 13
that you have written the book and handed it to
"On the day I inaugurated Akshardham, Delhi,
I found a teacher in Pramukh Swamiji. A great
teacher. That day I decided I must write with my
friend Arun Tiwari a book. It's not a book. It's a
tribute. It's a tribute to a great leader.
"In 1941, I was a 10-year-old boy in British
India. My father lived 103 years. My mother, 98
years. Second World War time. Difficult times,
but they were giving whatever possible [to oth -
ers]. Even their food they would share - both my mother and father. In my home, I had two
teachers: father and mother.
"Then in 1960s, 70s and 80s, I had again three
great teachers: Prof. Vikram Sarabhai, a visionary
from Gujarat. He gave the whole country the vi-
sion for satellite launch vehicles and spacecrafts. Then, Prof. Satish Dhawan. He became the next chairman. I worked with him also. He was a great
teacher. Not only was he the chairman of ISRO,
he taught all of us: when a problem comes, you
become the captain of the problem, defeat the
"At the same time, another person, Prof.
Brahma Prakash. He was our director. He worked
with integrity and succeeded with integrity.
Embodiment of integrity. What a great fortune
I had - Shiva Subramanian Iyer, [a teacher] in
elementary school, [and] before him my parents.
Then, these three great teachers at ISRO.
"Then 2001, I met Maha Pramukh Swamiji.
I didn't realize he is going to be my teacher. Not
only a good teacher, I found in him a great teach -
er. He taught me: remove I and me. Remove I and me. If you remove I and me it's a beautiful Author, Dr Kalam, and co-author, Prof. Arun Tiwari, with Swamishri
14 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015life. Happy life. Spiritual life. This is what I learnt
from Maha Pramukh Swamiji.
"When we were writing the book, of course
we studied about the system. Over a few decades how the system has grown today to such a level.
A spiritual force connecting millions of people
in our country and abroad. Again and again, the
message came to us: remove I and me. Ego will
vanish. If ego vanishes hatred will vanish. If ha-
tred vanishes, peace will come. That's the lesson this organization teaches all of us.
"It is a work we have completed. We feel bliss.
Maha Pramukh Swamiji smiled when he saw the book. That smile gave me bliss. We have done for
the society, for the people of India. This book's
message is transcendence. Transcendence means
you have a beautiful happy life. That's the mes -
sage of life. The message of the book."Thereafter, Dr Kalam went to the Yagnapurush
Assembly Hall to address the thousands of BAPS youths who had gathered from Ahmedabad,
Vadodara, Anand, Nadiad, Gandhinagar, Rajkot,
Bhavngar and other places throughout Gujarat.
PROF. ARUN TIWARI INTERVIEW
Q: Please describe the process of writing
Prof. Tiwari: Last year, Dr Kalam came here
to meet Pramukh Swamiji and I came with him. And at that time, Dr Kalam told me that for many years he had wanted to write his experiences about Pramukh Swamiji. He called it a spiritual
fellowship. So, he said, "I want to capture my spiritual fellowship with Pramukh Swamiji. But somehow it has not happened for various rea -
sons." So, he gave me the task to do it as soon as
Swamishri presents a commemorative plaque to Dr Kalam
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 15possible. Because, he said, "If I do not hand over
my experiences before Pramukh Swamiji then it
will be the biggest disappointment of my life."
I have been with Dr Kalam for the last 33 years
and I consider myself as his student. See, the prob -
lem in writing this book is that both Dr Kalam and Pramukh Swamiji are giants and almost everything
about them has been written and recorded. So,
what more you can do? So, this was the challenge.
Dr Kalam is very fond of walking and the first
thing we should learn about walking with Dr Kalam
is that at any instant he can change his direction.
Second thing is, he's an abstract thinker. So,
while explaining to you some very complex phe-
nomena he would ask you, "Have you eaten this
jamun here?" and then you get clean bowled. One
minute he's talking about the brahmand and sud-denly he'd be asking about jamun . But that is his way of cultivating your alertness and checking whether you are receiving what he is telling you.
So, there were at least about 20 to 25 walking
sessions like this with him.
A second challenge was that from these two
oceans of information, what to take and what
to leave. Because, after all, the book is about
This book is very harmonious. It has four pil -
lars. One pillar is the meetings which Dr Kalam and
Pramukh Swamiji had with each other. The second
pillar is the major works of the Sanstha - that you
sorted out the problem of two warring communi -
ties, de-addiction programmes, ghar sabhas . Very
revolutionary and, in sociological terms, I do not
see any parallel. And above all, when a foreigner
comes to see Akshardham Temple and the archi -
tecture and this kind of majesty the perception
Dr Kalam holds Swamishri's hand while narrating his experiences
16 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015of the country from a country of snake charm -
ers and rope trick people changes. Now we are
making our architectural monuments in those so -
cieties. So, this is a great change. This is pride for the nation.
The third chapter was very interesting, be -
cause what I found is that Pramukh Swamiji is
a great spiritual person, but the way he imple -
mented the Akshardham projects, he's better than any engineer, he's superior to any architect and,
above all, he is a perfect manager. On the other
hand, Dr Kalam is a scientist, and he has depth
of spirituality. So, somewhere it struck me that
looking at science and spirituality as two separate
processes is a big mistake. I think both are the same. Both are two faces of the same coin.
So, we did some research and we found about
all these great scientists. [They were] very spir -
itual people. So, the third part talks about science and spirituality.
The fourth part is about leadership. Now, if
you look at the leadership of Pramukh Swamiji
his management, his leadership I have not seen
anywhere. Are there any examples of this kind of
leadership? So, we put some great creative lead -
ers - Vikram Sarabhai, Verghese Kurien . These great people, great leaders.
Q: Your favourite section from the book?Prof. Tiwari: To be truthful to you, I like the
Epilogue the most. As you say, the last scene. In
L to R: Jnaneshwar Swami, Atmaswarup Swami, Anandswarup Swami, Viveksagar Swami, Ishwarcharan Swami, Dr Kalam,
Pramukh Swami Maharaj, Prof. Tiwari, Dr Dwami, Bhaktipriya Swami, Tyagvallabh Swami, Brahmavihari Swami, Mr. Sukumar
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 17the Epilogue, Dr Kalam wakes up and says I
mean I don't want to spoil the beauty of the Epi -
logue, but he dozed off and he saw that he is in
space with Pramukh Swamiji. And at the end of
the Epilogue, he says that he woke up and realized
that he was sitting in his lounge. Then he says at
the end, was it a dream or is this a dream into
which I have woken up?
Q: What is the one thing that touches you
most about Pramukh Swami Maharaj?
Prof. Tiwari : If somebody is trying to look
at Pramukh Swamiji with the mirrors of some
intellectual thought process or with some other
kind of things, I think he will fail in that mission.
He is Brahmaswarup. And, as per definition he
cannot be defined. So, if I have seen anybody in
my life Dr Kalam is a great human being, but after meeting Pramukh Swamiji I think I have a feeling of Brahman. If I say anything more, I will
be diluting the essence.
Q: Why did you choose the name
'Transcendence' for this book?
Prof. Tiwari : We looked at so many names.
Whatever name we thought, we were trying to match it with Pramukh Swamiji. So, we arrived at
'Transcendence', which is gunatit . After all, one
translation of transcendence is gunatit . Somebody
who is beyond guna - that is Pramukh Swamiji.
So, that gunatit we translated to transcendence.
Q: What is that one-line central message of
Prof. Tiwari: One is purity and second is in-
tegrity. Now, when I say purity, I can see there are three things operating in our consciousness.

18 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015One is 'I think', second thing, 'I speak', and third
thing, 'I do'. Now, for most people these three things are not matching. What they think, they
don't speak. What they speak, they don't do.
Now, if you can match these three - what you
think, what you speak and what you do - it is
pious. I think this is what Pramukh Swamiji is and it is very difficult to remain there.
I have never seen any greater example of pu -
rity than Dr Abdul Kalam and Pramukh Swamiji.
They have so many temptations. So effortlessly they are untouched by the temptations is some-
Many times in the last one week we were tell -
ing Dr Kalam to accede to the request of coming
here in a helicopter. Dozens of helicopters were
lined up. He said no. He said, "If given a chance, I will walk. I am going to somebody who is my spiritual better."
Then, last night, at 1.15 in the morning,
he wanted to write something about Pramukh
Swamiji. His two secretaries and other friends
suggested 'My Spiritual Friend'. Then he said,
"How can I, a human being, be a friend of brahm -
swarup?" Then somebody said 'fellow'. He said,
"No - he is guru, I am shishya. How can guru-shishya be 'fellow'?" So, what do we do?
He said 'teacher'. Then, I suggested he write
'My revered teacher'. He said, "You are trying
to capture Pramukh Swamiji into 'My teacher'.
Who am I? I am not even a worthy student. So,
write, 'Revered spiritual teacher', and 'My re -
spects', because the respect is mine. But he cannot
be my teacher alone. I am one of his millions of
Symbol of deep friendship between Dr Kalam and Swamishri
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 19
Address to BAPS Youths
20 June 2015, Sarangpur
Dr APJ Abdul Kalam presented his book,
T ranscendence, to H.H. Pramukh Swami Maharaj in Sarangpur
and thereafter he addressed a gathering of sadhus and BAPS youths.
We present a transcription of his speech.
20 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015Friends, greetings to all of you. A few
minutes back I was with Maha Pramukh
Swamiji. I have written a book with
Professor Arun Tiwari. When I gave the book, Pramukh Swamiji smiled. What does his smile
mean. Everybody smiles, but when Pramukh
Swamiji smiles it means something. I was in the company of Pramukh Swamiji for 15 minutes. At
the end of 15 minutes I got a great message. You will repeat the message:
Where there is righteousness in the heartthere is beauty in the character,
Where there is beauty in the character
there is harmony in the home,
When there is harmony in the home
there is order in the nation,
When there is order in the nation
there is peace in the world.
By meeting Pramukh Swamiji I found right -
eousness in his heart; I saw peace in the world. Where there is a righteous heart there is peace
in the world. And that's what I saw today. It is a
Respected Swamijis, sadhus, devotees and students who are seated here. My greetings.
What do we need? The world needs prosper -
ity without poverty, peace without fear of God
and a happy place to live for all the citizens of
the nation. This is what we need. And that is the
message being transmitted from Pramukh Swamiji
and this esteemed great place.
Friends, I have come to Sarangpur to meet
Param Pujya Pramukh Swami Maharaj and pre -
sent to him personally the book I have written with my friend Prof. Arun Tiwari, T ranscendence:
My Spiritual Experiences with Pramukh Swamiji.
This was my very dear project of many years. I
made a promise to Pramukh Swami on the inau -
guration day of Akshardham, New Delhi, that I will write a book on his great spiritual life. Today,
I have fulfilled that promise.
Friends, yesterday, I was in the company of
different people: one was a Jain Muni, a Haji
who had returned from Mecca, and the third was
a Swamiji. They saw the copy of T ranscendence
and all three asked me one question, what made me write this book? What incident inspired me?
I said, Pramukh Swami inspired me from the day
Sadhus and several thousand BAPS youths attended the special Youth Assembly
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 21I met him on 30 June 2001. But one incident
deeply touched me. On the next day of the ter -
rorist attack at Akshardham, Gandhinagar, on 25 September 2002, there were many bodies of devo -
tees and terrorists who were killed in the attack. Pramukh Swamiji came with Gangajal (holy water
of River Ganga) in his kamandal and showered
it on each body without any discrimination, be it
a devotee, a security personnel or the attackers. He silently displayed to the world that every hu -
man life is sacred. Life comes from one God and returns to the only God. His magnanimity gave
me the urge and strength to explore the spiritual
life of Pramukh Swamiji and bring out this book
with my friend Arun.
Friends, today I've thought of sharing about
my spiritual journey. I have one question for all
of you, "How to become a unique you?" So after
my talk when you go out of this beautiful audi -
torium you'll go with the confidence that I can become unique.
Dear friends, look up. What do you see? The light, the electric bulbs. Immediately our thoughts go to the inventor, Thomas Alva Edison, for his
unique contribution towards the invention of the electric bulb and his electrical lighting system.
When he was a nine-year-old boy in New York he
lived with his parents, and they used oil lamps or
candle for light. He said he would electrify New York based on Faraday's Law. And he electrified
the whole world. So he was a unique personality.
When you hear the sound of an aeroplane
going over your house, whom do you think of? The Wright brothers proved that man could fly,
though at a risk and cost. In 1885 Prof. Calvin
said anything heavier than air cannot be flown.
But the Wright brothers proved that it could be
flown. So don't go near people who say that
it's impossible. Everything is possible in science
Of whom does the telephone remind you? Of
course, Alexander Graham Bell.
When everybody considered sea travel as a
voyage, a unique person during his sea travel from
United Kingdom to India was pondering on why
the horizon where the sky and sea meet, looks

22 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015blue? His nine-year research resulted in the phe -
nomena of scattering of light and he was awarded
the Nobel Prize. He was Sir C.V . Raman.
Friends, there was a great scientific lady, who
is known for discovering radium. She won not
one, but two Nobel Prizes: one for physics and
another for chemistry. Who was she? She was
Madam Curie. Madam Curie discovered radium
and the effect of radiation on the human system.
The same radiation, which she had discovered,
affected her and she sacrificed her life for remov -
ing the [physical] pain in human life.
All these great personalities are unique. They
dedicated their lives to science. What made them do that? What made them unique?
Friends, I have, so far, met more than 21
million youths in India and abroad in the last
two decades. I learnt, "Every youth wants to be
unique. But the world all around you is doing its
best, day and night, to make you just like every -
body else." The challenge, my young friends, is that you have to fight the hardest battle, which any human being can ever imagine to fight,
and never stop fighting until you arrive at your destined place - that is a Unique You!
HOW TO BECOME UNIQUE YOU?
Life is a journey that must be travelled, no
matter how bad the roads are. There are four proven steps I have studied about unique people:
The first step is to decide which road you want
to take by having a great aim in life. Having a
small aim is a crime. You must have a great aim.
The second step is to continuously acquire
knowledge through great books, great human
beings and great teachers.
The third is hard work. When everybody is
sleeping there are lights burning in some peo -
The fourth step is that when you do any work,
whether spiritual, technical, scientific or politi -
cal work, there will always be some problems.
The problems should not become your captain;
you should become the captain of the prob -
lems. Defeat the problems and succeed. This is called perseverance.
So, if you want to become unique, you have
to have four qualities: great aim, continuously
Sadguru sadhus, Dr Kalam and other guests on stage during the assembly
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 23acquire knowledge, hard work and perseverance.
Now I want to tell you how to fly. Do you
want to fly? Now repeat with me:
I am born with potential.
I am born with goodness and trust.
I am born with ideas and dreams.
I am born with greatness.
I am born with confidence.
I am born with courage.
So, I am not meant for crawling.
I will fly, I will fly and fly.
Friends, while I was talking to the senior sad -
hus I told them a story. When I was a 10-year-old boy in Rameshwaram I was studying in an
elementary school in 1941. At that time it was
British India. When I finished school everyday I
used to come home at 8.00 p.m. The reason being
I used to deliver newspapers from 6.00 to 8.00
p.m. I was a newspaper boy. Once, on coming home I saw three people: Lakshmana Shastrigal, the head priest of Rameshwaram Shiv temple,
Rev. Father Bodal who built the first church in Rameshwaram and my father who was an Imam
of the mosque. I saw them every Friday at my
house. I was astonished because they had dif -
ferent attires. These three people would sit and
discuss. There was a war going on in 1941. There
was a famine on our island. So, they discussed
about how to generate work, how to help when
there were troubles, and how to help the health -
care and education systems. From them I learnt the beautiful lesson about how to work together.
As a young engineer I worked with Dr Brahma
Prakash. He taught me how tolerance of others'
views and opinions is essential in building teams
and accomplishing tasks that are beyond an indi-
vidual's capacity. Certain works an individual can
do, whereas for other works a team is required. He taught me that life is a precious gift, but it
comes with responsibility. With this gift, we are expected to use our talents to make the world a

24 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015better place.
In 1978, I became a pro -
ject director. I worked with
who taught me that a good leader takes the respon -
sibility for the failures of
his team. When I failed in
the first SLV 3 programme,
Satish Dhawan, the chair -
man, took the failure upon himself. When I succeeded next year, Satish Dhawan told me to address the press conference to cel -
ebrate the success. This is great leadership, be it
in spiritual, technical, media or political matters or in science. The leader should give the credit of
success to his team. If there is failure the leader
should absorb the failure. This is the great mes-
sage I learned when I was working in ISRO.
Later, I met Jain muni Acharya Mahapragya,
who made me realize the affirmation of a divine
life upon earth and an immortal sense in mortal
existence. I wrote with him a book called Family
GREAT MEETING WITH PRAMUKH SWAMIJI
It was an important spiritual day of my life
when I first met Pramukh Swamiji. More than a
decade ago, as the Principal Scientific Advisor to
the Government of India, I visited Bhuj to review
the rehabilitation work in the aftermath of the
earthquake. There I met Sadhu Brahmaviharidas. He asked me: "After the detonation of the first
atomic bomb, Robert Oppenheimer remembered
the Gita: 'Time I am the shatterer of the world.' What came to your mind after you detonated
India's first atomic bomb?" I was puzzled by his
question, and I said, "The energy of God does
not shatter, but unifies minds," to which he re -
plied, "Our spiritual leader, Pramukh Swamiji is a great unifier. He has unified all our energies to regenerate and restore life from the rubble of damage." I was moved and expressed my desire to meet such a Swamiji.
So friends, my best
wishes to all the mem -
bers assembled here and
the BAPS in its mission of
spreading compassion, love and understanding.
Now I would like
to hear some questions
Question: What was the first thing that came to
your mind when you met Pramukh Swami today?
Answer: When I met him I remembered his
life as a young boy. He's a farmer's son. And from a farmer's son to the growth of BAPS for mil -
lions of people [is a great story]. Now this book, T ranscendence , is about my experiences with
Maha-Pramukh Swamiji - experiences of nearly
two decades, from the birth of Akshardham till
today. I have seen how he brings peace, happiness
Question: What is the reason for your tremen-
dous energy and enthusiasm?
Answer: One thought I have is what can I give.
The opposite of it is what can I take - that is a
very harmful 'fellow'. What you all are learning
in this campus is what can I give. If you give,
you get all the happiness, if you give you get all the enthusiasm, and if you give you get all the
prosperity. If you follow the opposite (of that),
OK friends, repeat with me: "An ignited mind
of youths is the most powerful resource on the
earth, above the earth and under the earth."
May God bless you all. uDr Kalam addresses the youths

July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 25
"I met Pramukh Swamiji, my ultimate teacher, unwittingly.
Fate and my curiosity had drawn me to him
What began as a chance introduction became a divine destiny."

"Pramukh Swamiji shared with me many times his wish for peace,
development, security and prosperity in the world.
He feels that Indian people's kindness, openness, tolerance and willingness to engage in
dialogue is inbuilt in our civilizational heritage. He firmly believes in the potential of the
Indian people to co-build a harmonious world where there is permanent peace, shared
prosperity, cooperation and a 'win-win' with all other countries."
- Dr APJ Abdul Kalam
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 25
26 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
Transcendence documents a 14-year jour -
ney, which is still on-going, between Dr
APJ Abdul Kalam - former president of
India and world-renowned missile scientist of India - and Pramukh Swami Maharaj - one of the most inspiring spiritual leaders of modern
times, the fifth spiritual successor of Bhagwan
Swaminarayan, and inheritor of a legacy of en -
lightened gurus that goes back to the early nine -
A SUMMARY OF THE BOOK
Dr Kalam, with co-author Prof. Arun Tiwari,
writes that what "began as a chance introduction"
in June 2001, blossomed into a deep friendship
and "became a divine destiny".
The book reveals that Dr Kalam, at heart, is
a genuine seeker of truth, progress and spiritual -
ity. He narrates his visits to famous places - re -
ligious and secular - worldwide and recollects
his spiritual and other experiences there. But it
is in the presence of Pramukh Swamiji that his
spirituality truly flourishes. Dr Kalam describes
Pramukh Swami as "my ultimate teacher" and re-
cords, "How do I summarize Pramukh Swamiji's
effect on me? He has indeed transformed me. He
is the ultimate stage of the spiritual ascent in my
life, which started with my father, was sustained
by Dr Brahma Prakash and Prof. Satish Dhawan;
now, finally, Pramukh Swamiji has put me in a
Dr Kalam resolved to write this book centred around Pramukh Swamiji despite the background differences between the two: Dr Kalam is an em -
inent scientist, Pramukh Swamiji is a religious
leader; and Dr Kalam was India's most popular
president involved with the unpredictable world
of politics, while Pramukh Swamiji has had no
such exposure and is little known outside his na -
tive Gujarat. What is especially remarkable about their profound friendship is that Dr Kalam is not
conversant in Gujarati - Pramukh Swamiji's na-
tive language - and Pramukh Swamiji is not con-
versant in English - Dr Kalam's main medium of
communication. This testifies to the inner spir -
itual bond they share, which has sustained and
enhanced their rapport with each other.
Dr Kalam expressed his doubts about the ap -
propriateness of such a book to his brother, 14
years his senior. His brother encouraged him to
"share with everyone details of the pious and vir -
tuous life of Pramukh Swamiji."
T ranscendence is divided into four parts.
The first describes Dr Kalam's interactions with Pramukh Swamiji. For over a decade, Dr Kalam
has interacted on numerous occasions with
Pramukh Swamiji, in person and by phone. The
second part highlights some of the outstanding
work and values of BAPS Swaminarayan Sanstha,
as inspired by Pramukh Swamiji. The third dis -
cusses the co-relation between science and spir -
ituality through the anecdotes and thoughts of
leading scientists, and the fourth reflects on the
ideals of creative leadership based on the lives of 30 June, Gujarat Vihar, New Delhi 13 August, BAPS Mandir, Ahmedabad
26 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 27
In Part One, Dr Kalam recalls some of the
inspiring messages he has learnt through his in -
teractions with Pramukh Swami Maharaj.
For example, during their first meeting in June
2001, Dr Kalam presented the plans of his vi -
sion for India 2020. Pramukh Swami then guided,
"Along with your five areas to transform India
add a sixth one - faith in God." At that time,
Dr Kalam describes, "I felt I was in the Divine
Presence There was a light radiating through
Pramukh Swamiji which illuminated my inner
self. I felt I had acquired a sixth sense."
Dr Kalam is deeply touched by Pramukh
Swami's stability of mind in testing circumstances.
He admires his ability to forgive and preserve
peace in the aftermath of the tragic Akshardham
terrorist attack in 2002, commenting, "His ardent
prayers were that such tragedies should never
afflict any community or any nation, anywhere
in the world Swamiji encouraged his followers
to pray, not punish Pramukh Swami's life is an
example of how to love peace, have peace and
He further states, "Pramukh Swamiji is a great
bridge in the vast archipelago of humanity. An archipelago is an island group. Humanity has
divided itself into hundreds of islands. These is -
lands are religions. Each island is a beautiful ter -
ritory, full of flora, fauna and inhabitants, and yet
disconnected from the others. Pramukh Swamiji
is connecting these different islands by making bridges of love and compassion."
After the opening ceremony of Swaminarayan
Akshardham in New Delhi in 2005, Dr Kalam
said to Pramukh Swami Maharaj, "When I see
Akshardham and your work 'I feel anything is
possible in the world. I want to work with you
for a better India.'"
During one meeting, Dr Kalam asks, "How
does one connect to God's consciousness?"
Pramukh Swami replied, "You are a rocket scien -
tist As long as there is the pull of gravity, what -
ever we throw up always comes down. Likewise,
as long as we are attracted and attached to the
material world, we are consigned to the cycle of
births and deaths. But as your worldly desires
decrease, you transcend and eventually connect
to God." Dr Kalam concludes, "Pramukh Swamiji
uses simple terms to convey complex truths."
In Part T wo, Dr Kalam highlights some of the
activities of BAPS Swaminarayan Sanstha, such
as the highly effective de-addiction campaigns
by BAPS children in India, the family assemblies
which continually inspire family harmony, the
educational activities which provide both secular
and spiritual training, the cultural values imparted by the Swaminarayan Akshardham complexes in
New Delhi and Gandhinagar, and other social,
cultural and spiritual activities. He also acknowl -
edges the outstanding contributions of BAPS mandirs built by Pramukh Swami outside India,
in the USA and UK, in nurturing and sustaining
Indian heritage and spirituality among NRIs. 8 February, Swaminarayan Akshardham, Gandhinagar 6 November, Swaminarayan Akshardham, New Delhi
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 27
28 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
Dr Kalam notes the profound effect Pramukh
Swamiji has on common people and his concern
for their well-being. He inspires youths to con -
tribute constructively to the progress and har -
mony of India and the world, by spotlighting
the successful approach of Pramukh Swamiji in uniting and advancing families and communities.
Further, he advocates the necessity of self-disci -
pline, sacrifice, tolerance, forgiveness and other virtues by demonstrating how Pramukh Swamiji exemplifies them in his life.
Dr Kalam has also given his vision for India
2020 to the nation's youths by listing the targets
that should be met to develop India.
And, on a personal level, Dr Kalam reveals,
"Pramukh Swamiji often sits in prayer throughout
the night for the problems of common people. I
have emulated this habit."
In Part 3, Dr Kalam selects eminent scientists
and thinkers and describes their observations and
thoughts on the relationship between science and
spirituality: Pythagoras, Galileo Galilei, Albert
Einstein, Gregor Mendel, Baruch Spinoza, Srinivas
Ramanujan, Jagdish Chandra Bose, Subrahmanyan
Chandrashekhar and Francis Collins.
His expresses that science has advanced and
provided much to humanity, but that spirituality
is also an essential component of human life.
In Part 4, Dr Kalam states, "I will be sharing
what I learned during my fellowship with Pramukh
Swamiji on leadership. He is a great spiritual leader and while observing his actions in leading the BAPS across the world, I have developed certain insights into how a great leader evolves." He then enumer -
ates "eight facets of creative leadership, namely - fearlessness, courage, ethical living, non-violence,
forgiveness, compassion, vision and coopera -
tion," through "the stories of Nachiketa, Abdul
Qadir, Abraham Lincoln, Thiruvalluvar, Mahatma
Gandhi, Nelson Mandela, the Dalai Lama, Vikram
Sarabhai and Verghese Kurien."
At the end of Part 4, Dr Kalam reveals, "I
wrote this book to record my experiences with Pramukh Swamiji, my reflections on his work and
the transformation that I experienced in his fel-
lowship. I see in Pramukh Swamiji a true embodi -
T ranscendence reveals much about the mindset
of Dr Kalam - his love for science, his inner spir -
ituality, his constant endeavour to improve and
learn, his infectious optimism and enthusiasm,
and his world view and vision for India.
This book's focus shifts from Pramukh
Swamiji to others, as Dr Kalam substantiates the
inspiring values he has learnt through his spiritual
experiences with Pramukh Swamiji by invoking
the examples of distinguished spiritual leaders, scientists, thinkers and others.
The book will appeal to youths and others
who seek guidance on the essential life values
necessary to complement their personal skills.
The book also features a 12-page section of
colour photographs which complements the book content. 11 September, Swaminarayan Akshardham, New Delhi 18 July, Swaminarayan Akshardham, New Delhi
28 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 29
INTRODUCTION OF THE AUTHORS AND
Dr A.P .J. Abdul Kalam was born and raised
in Rameswaram, Tamil Nadu. His passion for
learning led him from humble beginnings to the prestigious Madras Institute of Technology, where
he became an aeronautical engineer. After a brief
stint at the Defence Research and Development
Organization of India (DRDO), Dr Kalam joined
the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO),
where he became the project director for India's
first Satellite Launch Vehicle (SLV-3), which placed
the Rohini satellite in orbit. Later, he rejoined the DRDO and played a pivotal role in the develop-
ment of India's ballistic missile systems. He even-tually rose to become the scientific advisor to the
defence minister of India and was later appointed
as principal scientific advisor to the Government of
India, with the rank of a cabinet minister, involved
in policy and strategy to transform India into a
developed nation and a nuclear weapons state.
Dr Kalam is the recipient of many national and
international awards, including honorary doc -
torates from forty-eight universities all over the
world. He received India's highest civilian award,
the Bharat Ratna, in 1997. Widespread recogni-tion, coupled with his extensive national service,
made Dr Kalam a popular choice for high office, and he became the eleventh president of India
in 2002. His popularity has endured, and he is
still affectionately called the 'people's president'
for bridging the gap between high office and the common people.
Dr Kalam has written over 30 books and is one
of India's most widely read and best-selling authors.
Arun Tiwari did his master's in mechani -
cal engineering from G.B. Pant University and joined the Defence Research & Development
Laboratory (DRDL) at Hyderabad as a missile
scientist in 1982. He was airframe designer and
project manager (system integration) in the first
three AKASH missile developmental flights. In
1992, on becoming chief of DRDO, Dr Kalam
decided to develop civilian spin-offs of defence technology and appointed Prof. Tiwari as the pro -
As a member of Dr Kalam's team, Arun Tiwari
set up the first link of Pan-Africa e-Network
of Telecommunications Consultants India Ltd
(TCIL). The network now connects universities
and hospitals across the African continent with
their Indian counterparts. In 1999, Arun Tiwari co-wrote Wings of Fire, the autobiography of Dr
A.P .J. Abdul Kalam. The book became a modern
classic, going into thirty reprints and selling more
than a million copies. It has been translated into
eighteen languages. He has written twelve books
Arun Tiwari is currently consulting to evolve
the blueprint for FDI in the defence sector and towards the creation of a strong Defence
Technological Industrial Base (DTIB) in India.
He is an adjunct professor in the School of 11 March, BAPS Mandir, Sarangpur 20 June, BAPS Mandir, Sarangpur
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 29
30 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
Management Sciences, University of Hyderabad.
Param Pujya Pramukh Swamiji is a deeply loved
and respected spiritual leader. Born as Shantilal
on 7 December 1921 in Chansad, Gujarat, India,
he grew up to be revered as the fifth spiritual suc -
cessor of Bhagwan Swaminarayan and the present
leader of Bochasanwasi Shri Akshar Purushottam
Swaminarayan Sanstha (BAPS) - an internation-
al socio-spiritual organization affiliated to the
At eighteen, he renounced the world, embrac -
ing the strict ascetic life of a Swaminarayan sad -
hu, and was renamed Narayanswarupdas Swami. In 1950, his guru Shastriji Maharaj recognized
his innate spirituality and appointed him as the
president (Pramukh) of BAPS; hence he is fondly
known as 'Pramukh Swamiji'. He selflessly served
society under two enlightened gurus: Shastriji
Maharaj and thereafter Yogiji Maharaj. And after
them, since 1971, he has built upon the firm foun -
dations laid by his gurus to spread the universal message and activities of BAPS worldwide.
He has travelled in India and abroad to
strengthen morality and spirituality, inspiring peo -
ple by personal counselling, through letters or tel -
ephone. He has built over 1,100 mandirs in India,
North America, the UK, Europe, Africa, Australia,
New Zealand and the Middle East, which serve
as perennial sources of spiritual inspiration and
social harmony. Moreover, he has created the mag -
nificent Swaminarayan Akshardham complexes in Gandhinagar and New Delhi, which enlighten
millions of visitors on India's ancient culture, tra -
ditions and values. With over 3,900 centres, 950 sadhus, 55,000 youth volunteers and millions of
followers worldwide, he inspires and oversees a
spectrum of humanitarian activities in fields as
diverse as educational, environmental, medical,
tribal, social, cultural and spiritual. However, what
touches countless people, including political, so -
cial and spiritual leaders across race, religion and region, is Pramukh Swamiji's personal humility,
simplicity, integrity, spirituality and universality.
Dr Kalam reads a passage from the book to Swamishri
30 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 31
Dr Kalam's Book about Pramukh Swami Maharaj
28 June 2015, Ahmedabad
On Sunday, 28 June 2015, the Gujarat University Convention & Exhibition
Centre in Ahmedabad was throbbing with excitement and joy because of the
eager presence of over 10,000 dignitaries, devotees and well-wishers who
had come from all corners of the city and other places to witness a landmark event.
The Centre and its grounds are the pride of Ahmedabad because of the spectrum of
grand events it hosts: national conventions, exhibitions, book fairs, celebration of
International Yoga Day and others. But today the event was very special. The venue
was hosting a seminal celebration - the celebration of 'Transcendence', a book by
Dr APJ Abdul Kalam about his spiritual experiences with Pramukh Swami Maharaj.
Over a week ago, on 20 June 2015, Dr Kalam had presented his book to Pramukh
Swami Maharaj in Sarangpur. The event today marked the first of three celebrations
of the book in India.
Prior to the evening's main event, the weekly Sunday satsang sabha commenced at
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 31
32 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
5.00 p.m. in the large
bition hall. Pujya Mahant Swami and Pujya Dr Swami addressed the devotees. Thereafter, the
senior sadhus felicitated Shri Hemubhai Gandhi,
who manages the Convention Centre on a con-
tract basis with the city authorities; Prof. Arun
Tiwari, co-author of the book; Shri Shantanu
Chaudhuri, representative of HarperCollins
India; and Jagdish Sound, who deals in providing public address systems.
From 6.00 p.m. invited guests started arriving
at the Convention Centre. They were welcomed by traditional tunes played by shehnai players
and youths tied the auspicious nada-chhadi on
their wrists. Thereafter the youths escorted them to the registration centre where their invitation
passes were scanned for their presence. Then each
guest was given prasad and ushered to their seat
in the auditorium. At 6.35 p.m., the main event,
celebrating 'Transcendence', commenced in the
auditorium. More than 2,300 guests, devotees and media persons had taken their seats and
Over 2,300 invited dignitaries and guests enjoy the celebrations in the main auditorium
Around 8,000 devotees enjoy the celebrations in the
32 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 33
positions. The entire programme was relayed live
onto a large LED screen in the nearby exhibi -
tion hall occupied by devotees. The master of ceremonies, Shri Mukeshbhai Patel, declared the
occasion as historic because it was a celebration
of two unique persons. Amidst Vedic chantings,
Pujya Mahant inaugurated the event by light -
ing the auspicious lamp before the murtis of
Shri Akshar-Purushottam Maharaj and Pramukh
Swami Maharaj. Pujya Ishwarcharan Swami gave the welcome address and spoke about Dr
Kalam's several meetings and experiences with Swamishri, "In his first meeting in New Delhi,
2001, Swamishri had advised him to add the sixth
dimension of faith for his 2020 project. In 2005, during the opening ceremo -
ny of Akshardham in New Delhi, Dr Kalam prom -
ised Pramukh Swami Maharaj that he would
write a book on him.
And during his recent visit
to Sarangpur in 2015 to
to Swamiji, he had experienced a deep sense of calmness and fulfillment."
A beautiful and impressive ten-minute anima -
tion video about a tale of two boys, prepared by BAPS volunteers, was shown on a 15 ft by 60
ft LED screen. It depicted the success stories of
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 33
34 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
a boatman's boy in Rameshwaram and a farm -
er's boy in Chansad (Gujarat). The former had
dreamed of flying and the latter of performing austerities in the Himalayas. Both were groomed
by two masters, one by Vikram Sarabhai and
Dr Brahma Prakash and the other by Shastriji
Maharaj and Yogiji Maharaj. Later, APJ Abdul
Kalam successfully launched the Rohini SLV sat -
ellite and became the 11th President of India, whereas Pramukh Swami Maharaj was appointed
as the President of BAPS and became the world-
renowned, fifth spiritual guru of the BAPS.
Then through divine grace they came together.
Thereafter, the photos of their subsequent meet-
ings were shown on the LED screen.
Pujya Brahmavihari Swami briefly recounted
in his speech about the key incidents
during the 14-year association
Kalam and Pramukh Swami
Maharaj. In all, Dr Kalam
had seven meetings and many
phone call conversations with
Pramukh Swami Maharaj. He
added that after Dr Kalam's
first meeting with Pramukh Swami Maharaj in
2001, Delhi, Dr Kalam had said he felt an inner
calm pervade him, and on the other hand Swamiji
had declared that Dr Kalam was a rishi. After witnessing the inauguration of Swaminarayan Akshardham in New Delhi, Dr Kalam saw peace on Swamishri's face and he promised to write a book on Pramukh Swamiji.
Thereafter, various quotes from T ranscendence
about Pramukh Swami Maharaj were presented
on the giant LED screen. The audience was mes-
merized and touched by the profound words of
The master of ceremonies, Shri Mukeshbhai
Patel, mentioned that the book was personally
presented by BAPS sadhus on 26 June to the Hon.
Prime Minister of India Shri Narendrabhai Modi
in New Delhi. Honourable Modi had offered his
accolades and compliments for the book. The
Chief Minister of Gujarat, Smt. Anandiben Patel,
had also sent a message of compliments for the
publication of the unique book.
The co-author of the book, Prof. Arun Tiwari,
narrated his experiences about
writing the book, "I am for -
tunate and feel my life is
blessed for standing here at the refuge of Pramukh
Swami Maharaj and be -
fore the Gujarati commu -
nity today. Last year, when
Dr Kalam called me to
Sarangpur, I had the honour of having Pramukh
Visual from 'A Tale of Two Boys': The boatman's boy from Rameshwaram
34 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 35
Swami Maharaj's darshan for the first time.
Thereafter, Kalam Saheb told me that it was his
heartfelt wish, since long, to write a book about
Pramukh Swamiji. He also told me to write the
book as early as possible because if he would not
be able to give the book in Pramukh Swamiji's
hands, then it would be of great disappointment
to him. So, I started the work. After a while Dr
Kalam asked me how many pages I had written.
But after a few weeks I realized I had not been
able to write anything. Then I came to Ahmedabad
and Pujya Brahmavihari Swami took me to Pujya
Ishwarcharan Swami, who blessed me by placing
his hand on my head and he gave me a murti of
Pramukh Swami Maharaj. I took the murti home
and sat down to type on my computer, and then
words and sentences started flowing spontane -
ously. I used to go to Kalam Saheb's home and we'd talk for hours. Kalam Saheb would recall
his memories [with Pramukh Swami]. Then I'd
come home and start typing before the murti of
Pramukh Swamiji. Then Kalam Saheb would read what I had typed. After one year the book was ready. While writing the book my feelings would
well up, and great personalities like Mahatma
Gandhi, Vikram Sarabhai, Nelson Mandela and
others would come to mind. It was then that I
realized that I was not writing the book, but there
was someone writing through me. After the book was over I went to Mahant Swami with a copy.
He wrote on the book that Kalam Saheb had ex-tracted the 'gold' in Pramukh Swami's life and
included it in the book. After these blessings, not a
single doubt remained in our minds about printing
this book. Thereafter, we went to HarperCollins,
and they printed it in a record two months.
"A few days ago I went to my mother in
Meerut. I took the souvenir plate given to me
by Pramukh Swami Maharaj. On seeing it, my
mother said, 'Son, you have done a wonderful
thing. One is an ocean of love - Pramukh Swamiji
- and the other is an ocean of knowledge - Abdul
Kalam. You have filled two great oceans in a small
pot [book]! So, son, on seeing this work of yours,
I, your mother, feel honoured. May all mothers'
sons do such work' - these were her blessings."
Thereafter, there was a brief video presenta -
tion of quotes from T ranscendence about Pramukh
Swami Maharaj's and BAPS's noble messages and services to society: Akshardham attack in 2002,
appaiya resolved and warring communities united
in 1990, anti-addiction drive by BAPS children
in 2007 and Pramukh Swami Maharaj's speech
at the United Nations in 2000.
Then the senior sadhus of BAPS and the
guests were invited onto the stage. Shri Shantanu
Chaudhuri, chief copy editor of HarperCollins
India, narrated his experiences about the process
Visual from 'A Tale of Two Boys': The farmer's boy from Chansad
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 35
36 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
of publishing the book, "It is
indeed a great privilege and
to have been given the op -
portunity to publish the
book [T ranscendence]. This
is indeed a historic book, and
I don't use the word lightly.
I have never come across an example of an ex-
President of a nation, a brilliant scientist, writing
about his experiences about a brilliant spiritual
leader. All of us might be aware of the excep -
tional manner in which some of the magnificent Akshardham mandirs have come up in New
Delhi, Toronto, London. Those mandirs, let me
tell you, are examples of divine grace at work.
And I personally feel, because I know the impos-
sibility of bringing out a book in two months, that
while editing and working on the book there was
a divine grace - the grace of Swami Pramukhji
working with us in making the book happen."
The 14 stage guests were honoured with bouquets of flowers: Shri Hemubhai Gandhi honoured Pujya Mahant Swami, Shri Parindu Bhagat honoured Pujya Dr Swami, Shri Narhari
Amin honoured Pujya Ishwarcharan Swami, Shri
Ajay Umat honoured the Governor of Gujarat
H.E. Dr O.P . Kohli, Shri Bharat Jhaveri honoured
Governor of Karnataka, H.E. Vajubhai Vala, Shri
Ramnikbhai Gajera honoured the BJP President
Shri Amit Shah, Shri Praveen Kotak honoured
Minister of State Shri Bhupendrasinh Chudasama,
Shri Sushil Agarwal honoured Minister of State
Shri Saurabhbhai Dalal, Shri P . K. Lehri (IAS) hon-
oured Prof. Arun Tiwari (co-author), Shri Devang
Nanavati honoured Padmashri B.V . Doshi, Shri
P .C. Thakor honoured Padmashri Dr Tejas Patel,
Shri Harshad Brahmabhatt honoured Shri Sanjay
Lalbhai (industrialist), Shri Satish Raval honoured
Shri Pradeep Dhoot (industrialist) and Shri Sunil
Talati honoured Shri Surendrabhai Patel (ex-
Thereafter, the celebration ceremony of the
book commenced with children coming from all Children holding divas sing Vedic verses prior to the book launch
36 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 37
the ailes of the auditorium with lighted lamps in
hand. While chanting Vedic mantras, some of the
children came onto the stage. The ambience in the
auditorium was suffused with divinity. Then balls
of floating flowers appeared on the giant LED
screen, climaxing with the opening of one giant
flower ball to reveal the book T ranscendence . A
thunderous applause rang out from all corners of the auditorium. Immediately thereafter, all
the stage guests inaugurated T ranscendence and
displayed the copies before the audience.
Shri Amit Shah, President of BJP , shared
his sentiments about Pramukh
"Whenever I have gone for
darshan, I have always had
some problems in my mind.
But the wonderful thing
is that though I'd remain silent about them, what -
ever Pramukh Swami would say resolved them altogether. I believe that Pramukh Swami Maharaj has reinstated the sadhu tradition in more dif -
ficult times than Adi Shankaracharya had faced
and done centuries ago. I truly believe that the
Hindu tradition has all the answers to today's
problems. After 50 to 100 years from now, when
the spiritual history of the world will be written,
then [Pramukh Swami Maharaj's works and] the
name of BAPS will be scribed on a golden page."
H.E. Shri Vajubhai Vala, the Governor of
Karnataka, reminisced about the
darshan and blessings he had
received from Yogiji Maharaj
Maharaj. He said, "Abdul
Kalamji has written a book
about his experiences with
Pramukh Swami Maharaj. A
saintly figure like Kalamji writ -
ing a book on a great sant like Pramukh Swami
Maharaj is the best work. In a country where the
law of dharma (dharma-dand) is held to be higher
H.E. Shri Vajubhai Vala
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 37
38 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
than the law of political power (raj- dand ), only
then can its people become cultured and happy.
Due to materialism one may have money and
riches, but if one is devoid of virtues like compas -
sion, love and sympathy then that wealth is useless. Similarly, power without virtue is also worthless.
"Whenever I have met Pramukh Swamiji I
have witnessed his peacefulness, love and cha -
risma. Today, I reveal to you all that on waking up every morning and before placing my feet on
the ground, I remember Pramukh Swami Maharaj
when I say 'Guru devo namaha'."
H.E. Dr O.P . Kohli, Governor of
Gujarat, addressed the occasion,
"Today, we have attained a
priceless book, because the
protagonist of this book is a spiritual sant, who strives to
give direction to all for living
a humane life. Pujya Pramukh
Swami Maharaj is the main subject of this book. The author of this book, de -
spite being a scientist, is a sant. So this book cannot
be said to have been written by a scientist about a sant; but it is a sant who has written about a sant.
That is why this book is priceless.
"The proximity of a spiritual person effects
a transformation in one's life. One finds peace, divinity and spirituality in the life of Pramukh
Swami Maharaj. A wonderful spirit must have
been born in the mind of Dr Kalam, and he has
tried to include those vibrations in this book.
I have as yet not had the darshan of Pramukh
Swami Maharaj. He touches the hearts of all be -
cause of his virtues. He also touches others by his silence. Pramukh Swami connects the different
islands of humanity through love, spirituality and
service. This is his unique work.
"Dr Kalam's book will contribute greatly
in spreading the message of Pramukh Swami
Maharaj in India and abroad. On this occasion, I
bow to Dr Kalam and Pramukh Swami Maharaj Stage guests display the book after the launch
H.E. Dr O.P . Kohli
38 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 39
and wish them good health and a long life."
Finally, Pujya Mahant Swami blessed the
event, saying, "Today, we have all
gathered here, so it is a divine
occasion. We have all come to -
gether because of two sants
- Dr Kalam and Swamishri.
We have not only come here
together physically, but all our
sentiments have become one.
"On opening a page from
this book, I read about Abdul Kalam meeting
Nelson Mandela during his visit to South Africa in
September 2004. When Dr Kalam asked him about
his freedom, Mr Mandela replied that he was free
from jail, but if he had harboured bitterness and
hatred towards his opponents he would still feel
imprisoned wherever he went. This is called tran-
scendence. Freedom means to give up bitterness
and hatred towards others. Dr Kalam has written
about higher values in this book and he has seen these higher values in Pramukh Swami Maharaj."
In conclusion, everyone stood up to sing the
national anthem. The audience dispersed with
prasad and warm memories.
The entire event was an eloquent testimony
to the spirit of volunteerism of over 1,300 BAPS
volunteers. Fifteen days of rigorous effort had
gone into planning, preparing and rehearsing the
event. Young and middle-aged male and female
volunteers had offered their untiring services in 18
different departments: stage programme, decora -
tion, electric, audio-visual, animation, bookstore, press, public relations, transport, parking, security,
crowd control, kitchen , drinking water and others.
The spectacular two-hour event left everyone
amazed and inspired, and lavishing praises about
the programme, discipline, management and di -
vine ambience. Though Pramukh Swami Maharaj was not physically present, all felt his divine pres -
ence throughout the celebration. u
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 39
40 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
Shantanu Chaudhuri, the chief copy editor of
HarperCollins India, spoke eloquently about
his experiences in publishing T ranscendence
at the Convention Centre in Ahmedabad. He said, "It is indeed a great privilege and honour to be
with you all this evening, and it is a great privi-
lege and honour for HarperCollins to have been
given the opportunity to publish the book. This is
indeed a historic book, and I don't use the word
lightly. It is historic for many reasons. For one,
in all my experiences in publishing I have never
come across an example of an ex-President of a
nation, a brilliant scientist writing about his ex-
periences about a brilliant spiritual leader. That
alone makes it a historic book. Apart from that
the numbers that we have printed of the book are
record-making. I can say this with some authority
that the hardback original edition of a book in
India never goes beyond 5 to 10,000 copies in
the first print. We have printed close to 100,000
copies of this book. And the book came out in
the middle of June, and in the last fifteen days we have negotiated rights for as many as seven
languages editions of the book.
Within the next few months the book will
be out in Hindi, Gujarati, Malayalam, Telugu,
Marathi, Kannada and Tamil. And most importantly, our international publishers in the US and UK are keen to publish this book under
their imprint Harper 360, which will make the
book available in the European continent, UK and
US. This is a book that deserves to be read all over
the world, and it will be read all over the world.
But beyond these material elements of success
of a book I think it is a book that is important
for its message. All of us here have spoken about
how the book brings together science and religion
in a wonderful blend in today's world of mate -
rialism and consumerism. I think any book that talks about religion and spirituality is important.
But more important, it talks about religion and
spirituality working in the everyday life of peo -
ple. A language which is not used in everyday life dies. Likewise, religion and spirituality if not
applied to everyday life will make no sense. And
this book actually does that through the experi -
ences that Dr Kalam had with Pramukh Swami Maharaj. He says how BAPS and Pramukh Swami
Maharaj have been working to make religion and spirituality a part and parcel of the everyday life
I worked personally on the text, and it was for
me inspiring to see the stories that have been nar -
rated: persecution in Uganda and people getting SHANTANU CHAUDHURI
Chief Copy Editor of HarperCollins India
'A HISTORIC BOOK''A HISTORIC BOOK'Transcendence
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 41
out from there and starting life anew. It is having
faith in nothing but God, that everything will turn
out well. It was a startling experience for me after
all these years in publishing.
I'd like to narrate a very personal experience
in the course of our work in publishing. We take
about eight to ten months on average to bring out
a book. There are so many books that are done at
a time. Incredibly this book came out in just two
months. I remember Prof. Tiwari coming to our
office and giving us the manuscript on 8 April.
By 15 May the book had been edited, proofread,
designed, cover done, everything worked out.
And by 15 June we had copies of the book. All of us might be aware of the exceptional manner
in which some of the magnificent Akshardham mandirs have come up in New Delhi, Toronto,
London. Those mandirs, let me tell you, are ex -
amples of divine grace at work. And I personally
feel, because I know the impossibility of bringing out a book in two months, that while editing and
working on the book there was a divine grace
- the grace of Swami Pramukhji working with
us in making the book happen. I encourage and
urge all of you to read the book and experience
the divine grace I have felt when working on the
book. Thank you so much for all your presence.
On 26 June 2015, at 4.30 p.m., Pujya
Ishwarcharan Swami, Atmaswarup Swami and
Brahmavihari Swami of BAPS Swaminarayan
Sanstha visited Hon. Prime Minister Narendra
Modi at his residence in New Delhi to personal -
ly present him a copy of Dr APJ Abdul Kalam's new book 'Transcendence: My Spiritual
Experiences with Pramukh Swamiji'. The del-
egation also included the co-author Prof. Arun
Tiwari and the CEO of HarperCollins India,
P .M. Sukumar. The Prime Minister, who has
known Pramukh Swami Maharaj for many
years and met him on numerous occasions, was delighted that Dr Kalam had written such
an enlightening and historic book. He also
fondly reminisced the occasions on which he
and Dr Kalam had collectively met Swamishri
in 2002 and 2004. He added how Dr Kalam
often and wholeheartedly encourages others to
visit Akshardham and meet Swamishri. Himself
a man of books, the Prime Minister said, "I am
looking forward to reading this book which
will be very useful and purposeful." He also
conveyed his prayers for Swamishri's health
and sought his blessings for serving the nation.'Transcendence'
Presented to Prime Minister
26 June 2015, New Delhi

42 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
This was truly transcendental, an incredible
event - very spiritual, very peaceful. It was beauti -
ful, elegant and focused! People talk about smart
cities and smart machines; this was a smart pro -
gramme that elevated the audience into a world
without ego and desires - a world of revered
Pramukh Swami Maharaj and Dr. Kalam.
- Padma Shri B.V . Doshi
It felt so good to be part of such an unforgetta -
ble occasion. I had the privilege to meet Pramukh
Swamiji three times but have somehow never felt
what I felt today in his physical absence. For the
first time I could not stop myself from slipping
into a meditative state with enormous force. Now
I wish so much and hope I get to be at his feet
once again to put an end to my many questions.
Today I felt I'm so close to my answers!
Apurva Amin (Leading Architect)
A top-most scientist and former President
of India has paid rich tributes to the spiritual
achievements of Pramukh Swami. The book
spreads the message of peace and love. It really
was a great function and I can say that all of us who attended had never seen or thought that such
an atmosphere of goodwill, peace and love for
mankind can be created.
- P .K. Lehri (Former Chief Secretary, Gujarat)
This a confluence of two great saints - a saint
of science, Dr. Kalam, and a saint of spiritual
bliss, Pramukh Swamiji. This work inspires love,
respect, friendship, compassion and the righteous
path of humanity in one's mind.
- P .C. Thakur
(Director General of Police, Gujarat)Today, a book was inaugurated - one in which
two souls communicate with each other's con -
sciousness and from that dialogue is brought forth
a message for the upliftment of humanity and the whole world. And when that message is recorded
by the pen of Dr. Kalam and with the blessings
of Pramukh Swami Maharaj, a truly great book
T ranscendence has been placed in our hands.
- P .K. Parmar (Additional Secretary, Gujarat)
I believe Pramukh Swami Maharaj to be a di-
vine representative of God himself. And when -
ever I have sat at his feet, without telling him
my problems, his answers have been suitable to
my problems. Pramukh Swami's spiritual guid -
ance, which he gave to none other than our most popular president and the greatest scientist India
has produced - Dr. Kalam, has been made into a
book. I hope that, in the times to come, this book
will serve as an inspiration and a guide to millions
of us who, in our daily lives, need that inspiration.
- Devang Nanavati (Leading Advocate)
Great discipline. I've never seen a book launch
function like this. I went to the launch of Abdul
Kalam's book T ranscendence. First, the parking vol -
unteers were so humble and helpful. Inside, you are greeted with shehnai music and no chaos.
On entry, the barcode on your entry pass is
scanned and an SMS is sent to the volunteers in -
side the auditorium to inform them of our arrival. Then you are given a bag with prasad, lemon water
and water. You are taken to your seat. Such disci-pline I have never seen in any programme. This was unique. Great arrangements. I was truly impressed by the arrangements.
- Dhvanit, Radio Jockey, Radio MirchiREFLECTIONS
Thousands of dignitaries and guests who attended the celebration of
'T ranscendence' in Ahmedabad on 28 June 2015 were impressed by the content, presentation
and divine ambience of the event. Reflections of a few guests are presented here.

July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 43
Dr APJ Abdul Kalam's visit to Sarangpur on 20 June 2015
to meet Pramukh Swami Maharaj and present to him his
book, T ranscendence: My Spiritual Experiences with Pramukh
Swamiji , was widely covered by the leading print and electronic
The accounts printed by the various newspapers described
the book presentation, book content, the youth assembly which
Dr Kalam addressed and other relevant details. Photographs
were also included in the various reports.
Newspapers: Gujarat Samachar , Divya Bhaskar , Sandesh ,
Navgujarat Samay , Janmabhumi Pravasi , Naya Padkar , Western
Times , Saurashtra Aspas , Sorathi Sur , Jay Hind , Kathiwad Post ,
Sanj Samachar (Rajkot), Fulchhab , Prabhat , Jansatta , Rajasthan
Patrika (Hindi), Midday (Mumbai), Mumbai Samachar
(Mumbai), The Times of India (English) and DNA (English).
The youth assembly which Dr Kalam addressed was broad -
cast on ZEE TV , NDTV , ETV , TV 9, GSTV and SANDESH TV .
The grand public celebration of T ranscendence: My Spiritual
Experiences with Pramukh Swamiji on 28 June 2015 at the
Gujarat University Convention Centre in Ahmedabad was at-
tended by many distinguished luminaries of Gujarat and re -
ceived good coverage in the print, electronic and social media.
Newspapers: Divya Bhaskar, Navgujarat Samay, Jansatta ,
Rajasthan Patrika , The Times of India (English) and Indian
TV channels: Door Darshan, Zee News, NDTV , India TV ,
TV 9, ANI, ETV , GSTV , Sandesh TV , Nirman TV (GTPL, a
Gujarati news channel) and VTV . u
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 43
44 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
Confucius said, "Our greatest glory is not in
never falling but in rising every time we fall."
A recent poll claims that most people around
the world just love the colour blue, the colour
But that's about colour. Whether you like blue
or not, the 'blues' engulf your life at some stage.
At a certain point of time, we feel down or
have the blues. If this feeling of despair stays for
quite some time, a person could be in the grip of
depression, a curse of modern life.
n A namika was newly married into a mid -
dle class, extended Vaishnav family of 20, liv -
ing in the Satellite suburb of Ahmedabad. After
about six months or so, she showed signs of
losing weight. Everything else was fine, but she
was losing weight. Medication prescribed by the
physician didn't help. So, a psychiatrist was con-
sulted. During one consulting session, a simple
yet startling reason became known.
Since Anamika was newly married and a
homemaker, all others in the family asked her to do even the simplest chores for them. So, she
was an overworked homemaker.
Housewives work many unrecorded hours
a week, while depending for money on their
n A poor , single-income couple with no kids,
living in a metro city in India was happily married
until the day when the wife had a craving for an
The couple had gone out to eat the previous
week, but the wife was adamant. The husband
reasoned that they couldn't afford it so often.
But the wife would not take it. And she com -
mitted suicide for being rebuffed.
n Sarvashreshtha Gupta, a 20-something IT
professional of India went to America in search of greener pastures. But he soon realized that he
could not take the rigid 100 hours-a-week work
schedule. He phoned his father in India saying he
wanted to come back home. His father agreed,
but before he could land in India, depressive
mood seized him and he ended his life.
"Suffering," Buddha said, "is inseparable from
life." So, struggles and setbacks in life have to
And how to manage it...
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 45
be handled carefully. A de -
pressive mood robs you of
even the simple pleasures of
life. Even spending a day can
Depression is not just a
sad mood. It could be more
Some telltale signs of clini -
1. A person turns short-tempered, grumpy
and even aggressive at times.
2. F eelings of hopelessness and helplessness.
3. Loss of sleep or sleeping too much.
4. Loss of appetite or overeating.
5. Inability to concentrate on daily tasks.
6. Thoughts th at life is not worth living.
7. A negative leaning for all matters concern -
8. A significan t loss of weight.
9. A tendency to lean towards escapist behav -
iour such as substance abuse, rash driving
DEPRESSION LINKED TO SUICIDE
Depression, if not treated, may lead to suicide.
A strong feeling of despair could make one feel that the only way out of the blues is suicide. A
patient with suicidal tendencies would be preoc -
cupied with death and dying and parts with his or her prized possessions.
If your problems sound overwhelming, you
should not lose hope. There are people to help you out.
Also, time is the best healer. One day, you will feel better
KNOW SOMEONE WHO IS
If you find someone among your friends and relatives is
getting suicidal, show sympa-thy and seek expert help. As
the proverb goes, 'A stitch in
Major: It doesn't allow you
to enjoy life and feel pleasure.
If not treated, major depression lasts for about six
Recurrent: It's a low grade depression when
one feels moderately depressed. Though it is mild,
if untreated, the symptoms could last as long as
Manic Depression: Its symptoms include cycli -
cal mood changes accompanied by hyperactivity,
rapid speech, and little or no sleep.
FACTORS THAT MAY LEAD TO DEPRESSION
l Early childhood trauma or abuse.
l Stressful life experiences.
l F inancial strain.
l Unemployment or underemployment.
l Lack of social support.
l Marital or relationship problems.
l Chronic diseases or other health issues.
l F amily history of depression.
MEN, WOMEN, TEENS AND OLDER PEOPLE
Depression affects men, women, teens and
older people in different ways. They need sup -
port and treatment according to
their age and gender.
Men: Men take depres -
sion as a sign of weakness and tend not to acknowledge
feelings of hopelessness and helplessness. Therefore, they
complain about sleep prob -
lems, loss of interest in work "Drive n by the cult of busyness,
we work more, sleep less,
and allow technology to
become the prime architect
Sherry Turkle (MIT Professor)
To manage stress and balance
emotions, you need to strengthen
your emotions. It enables you to
cope with trauma and loss.
So, learn to express your
emotions better and effectively.
46 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
and hobbies and irritability.
Such men tend to be angry,
violent and reckless in be -
haviour, often taking to sub -
Women: The rates of
depression in women are twice as high as they are in men which is due partly to
hormonal factors relating to
They have stronger feelings of guilt, and tend
to overeat, sleep excessively and gain weight.
Teens: Irritability is predominant in them.
They get hostile, grumpy and lose their temper.
If it is not treated, teenage depression could
raise problems at home and school, result in
drug abuse and even lead to homicidal violence
Older People: Reasons for depression in the
old include bereavement, loss of independence
and health problems. Treating the old is very im -
portant since depression in them is largely associ -
ated with poor health, a high mortality rate and
an increased risk of suicide.
NOT JUST ANOTHER AILMENT
Treating depression is not as simple as having
surgery if you have a tumour. It is not just the
result of a chemical imbalance in the brain which
can be cured with medication.
According to experts, depression is a combina -
tion of biological, psychological and social factors.
THE CURE AND RECOVERY
could vary from person to
person. Antidepressants may not work. So you
have to tap the many treat -
ment options. More than the
medication, it would be help-
ful to try social support, lifestyle changes, emotional
skills building and profes -
Reach out to others.
Confide in them. So, your
family and friends should know what ails you and in
what manner they can sup -
To an extent medication or
antidepressants can help. But they aren't a cure
and have side effects. Some antidepressants may
also cause insomnia due to their stimulating effect.
There are three most common treatments for
depression. They are psychotherapy, medication
and electroconvulsive therapy. The UK National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
guidelines suggest that antidepressants should not
be used for mild depression as the risk-benefit
Another effective way to manage depression
is to practise meditation and yoga. Both means
calm the mind and relax the body. Also, listening
to the divine lila of God and his devotees ( katha )
pacifies the mind and soul. In brief, spiritual prac -
tices reduce anxiety and instil hope, confidence
The more cluttered our lives are with work,
information, entertainment, technology and
other trappings of worldly success, the less we
have room for authentic intimacy, sharing of
life's challenges with those who really care. Until
recently, the extended family and neighbours
used to act as emotional buffers. Today our
cities are more crowded, yet more people
live alone in our cities.
India's Leading Social Psychologist
1. Sometime s you just need
from people. If they care,
they'll notice. If they don't,
you know where you stand.
2. People who die by
way of suicide, don't want
to end their lives.
They want to end their pain.
46 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 47Eknath (1533-1606 ce), a prominent saint of
Maharashtra, was responsible for integrat -
ing the Hindu society of his day. In this,
he carried on the work started by his predeces -
sors like Sant Jnaneshvar and Namdev. He lost
his parents, Suryanarayan and Rukmini, at a very
young age and was brought up by his grandfa-
ther, Chakrapani. Despite the personal tragedy,
Eknath turned out to be a brilliant scholar from his childhood. He was invested with the sacred
thread at the age of six. Even at that young age, he became acquainted with the Ramayan, the Mahabharat and the Purans by merely listening to their recitals. He was a profound scholar in Sanskrit, Marathi and Hindi. His most famous
work is Eknathi Bhagavat , which he began in 1570
and completed in 1580 at Kashi. His other works
are Svanthasukh, Chatuhsloki Bhagavat Tika,
Hastamalak, Anandalahiri, Bhavartha Ramayan
and Rukminisvayamvar. As he was devoted to the
divine from his childhood, he wished to acquire
brahmajnan and began to yearn for a guru so that
he could tread the true path by his grace. It is said that one night he was sitting in a Shiv mandir when he heard a voice from the sky proclaim, "Proceed
to Devgarh and meet Janardan Pant, he will fulfil
your desire (for a guru).''
As directed, he hastened to Devgarh and had
the darshan of Janardan. The interview be -
tween the guru and his would-be disciple was
out of the ordinary. Janardan asked him as to
what had made him leave home and parents at
such a young age. To this the young aspirant re -
plied he had several parents in his lives and to which parents was the guru referring. The guru
was amazed by the reply from one so young and
decided to accept him as his disciple. In those days
the guru would subject the disciple to a rigorous
test, sometimes not connected with the purpose
for which the intended disciple had approached
him. Eknath was asked to look after the accounts.
Once it so happened that the accounts did not
tally. Eknath sat late into the night poring over
the ledger to detect where he had gone wrong.
Finally, he arrived at the right figure and felt so happy that he began to clap for joy. The clapping
awakened the guru, who inquired what had made
his disciple so happy. Eknath explained about the
mistake in the tallying which had been troubling
him. The guru retorted, "The rectification of a
small sum has given you so much joy. If you detect
your big mistake in this world how much more happy you would be. If you search for Bhagwan
you can certainly find him, as he is not far away.''
By that time the youngster had already served
Eknath saw God in every being and
had scant regard for the caste system.
This often got him into conflict
with the Brahmin orthodoxy.
Despite insurmountable obstacles he
society of his dayGREAT SAINT-POETS OF INDIA: Varanasi Rama Murthy
48 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015him so well that Janardan wanted to help him to
the maximum extent possible. The best way was to grace the youth with the darshan of his guru,
Dattatreya, and that he would appear in the form
of his choice. Eknath was delighted at his guru's
words. On the first occasion, Dattatreya came in
the guise of a Muslim fakir, but Eknath would
not accept food from the fakir. The second time,
Eknath was taken to the jungle. Dattatreya once
again came in the dress of a fakir. This time, too,
there was initial resistance on the part of Eknath,
but his guru succeeded in persuading him to eat
Dattatreya's leftovers. It is said that after that
Dattatrya prophesied that Eknath would write
Bhavartha Ramayan, a simplified version of the
Ramayan which could be understood by common people. It is said that Shri Ram himself appeared
to Eknath in his dream and commanded him to
compose the Bhavartha Ramayan.
According to Mahipati, who wrote on the lives
of great saints, Janardan felt sorry that Eknath joined him at a young age without seeking his
grandparents' permission, so he asked the boy
recluse to return home. This Eknath did to the
delight of his aged grandparents. He married a
pious girl and maintained his house to the best
of his ability. Several stories are related about his
hospitality. Anyone could come and have food at
his house. This brought him into a head-on clash
with the Brahmin orthodoxy who resented un -
touchables being fed at his house. This was when Eknath invoked the spirits of his ancestors at the
time of shraddha . The Dalits were fed first to the
chagrin of the Brahmin guests. As a protest they boycotted the feast. But soon they realized their mistake when the ancestral spirits were found par -
ticipating in the feast.
Brahmins in those days were not allowed to
mix freely with the lower caste Hindus. Those
who did so faced stiff opposition. Eknath fell vic -
tim to this practice. He did not believe in such social taboos. To him everyone was equal before God. The fate of an individual is decided by what he does and not by his social status.
An incident is often narrated to illustrate
Eknath's love for living beings. Once, he was going
on a pilgrimage to Rameshwaram carrying water
from the Ganga, which he wanted to offer to the
deity. On the way, he found a donkey dying of
thirst. Without a second thought, he gave the holy
water to the dying donkey to revive it. His fellow
pilgrims angrily questioned, "What will you offer
to Lord Rameshwara?" Ekanath replied, "I have
offered the holy water to Rameshwara because the
same Lord resides in this donkey." He saw God
everywhere and in every being. For him, saving a
donkey dying of thirst was more important than
reserving the water for worshipping God.
Another story speaks about his unremit -
ting tolerance. Once, he went for a bath in the
Godavari River. On returning, a Muslim spat on
him. Instead of taking offence, Eknath entered the
river to bathe once again. When he came out the Muslim spat on him again. Eknath bathed again
without a murmur. Eknath was compelled to
bathe 108 times like this. In the end, his Muslim
tormentor got tired and realizing the greatness
of Eknath, gave up his efforts to harass the saint
and sought Eknath's forgiveness for his conduct.
Eknath knew the exact moment of his death.
He prepared his disciples for it. He discarded
his perfectly healthy body on the banks of the
Godavari. Such was the mastery he had over his
Mahipat's Bhaktavijaya translated from
Marathi into English by Prof G.R. Godbole.
Charitra Kosh, Editor, Shri Narayan
Kalyan Bhakta Charitank (Code 40), Gita

July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 49
Dhaval Patel recounts how he retains satsang
in his career as a commercial airline pilot PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
From a young age I had nursed an ambition
to become a commercial airline pilot.
After completing 12th grade in Nairobi I
went to Florida, USA, in 2004 for pilot training. My fees were to be sponsored by a relative, but
things went awry. I was disheartened and left in
a lurch. A few days later I came to know that
Pramukh Swami Maharaj was presiding over a
shibir in Orlando. I went to Swamishri and told
him of my predicament. Swamishri thought for a while and blessed me, "Everything will work
out." I felt reassured and confident. Immediately
thereafter my brother-in-law agreed to help me
pay my fees and I started the training. I worked
hard and completed the course before the
I returned to Nairobi and started working
at the domestic airport, flying small planes.
My job was to transport UN staff members to
Somalia, where they provided aid and carried out
infrastructure projects. The safety conditions in
Somalia were quite precarious because of the
local rebels. They often attacked foreign staff
and planes landing for relief work. I had wanted to move on to a better job, so I applied to Kenya
Airways. Many months passed by without any
response. The task of landing planes in Somalia
was becoming more risky and dangerous day by
day. Then one morning I received a letter for the
interview. On the day of the interview the plane
I was going to fly to Somalia was shot down by
the rebels. The captain whom I would have been
with was killed. I passed my interview and got a
job as a co-pilot in Kenya Airways.The profession of an airline pilot is interesting
and one also gets the benefit of perks. We get
two days off after an eight-hour duty and are provided five-star accommodation. Food and
drinks are on the house. Being a satsangi I strictly
follow the satsang niyams. Prior to flying I always
start by praying, "Shrimad sadguna sh linam "
and remember Maharaj and Swami. I chant the Swaminarayan mantra before putting my hands
on the joystick and controls.
I was initiated into satsang during my child -
hood days. I regularly attended the weekly bal
sabha at the mandir in Nairobi. Ever since, I have
been doing my puja daily. I am a strict vegetarian,
and abstain from drinking and eating onions and
garlic. I believe you can practise the niyams of
our sampradaya wherever you are and whatever profession you are in. If you have the will you can
abide by the niyams . My associates drink when
off duty and they have often invited me to join them, but I've never complied. I sing the cheshta
daily. There have been occasions where I've had to sing the cheshta at 6.00 a.m., after reaching
my destination. During such occasions, my puja
or cheshta does get protracted for at least an hour
because of fatigue and dozing. I've made it a point not to miss doing puja
1 and singing the cheshta
wherever I am. I do the tilak-chandlo daily and
(Contd. on pg. 53)
1. Once Dhaval was flying a passenger plane from Kenya to
China. On reaching there, he realized he had forgotten
his puja. He sent a message home to send his puja on the next flight. Till his puja arrived, 24 hours later, Dhaval
fasted as per the injunctions of the Shikshapatri. Only
after performing his puja did he take food and water.
50 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015With the blessings of Pramukh Swami
Maharaj, Pujya Mahant and sant man -
dal embarked upon satsang vicharan
in the Asia-Pacific region. The vicharan , from 31
March to 20 June 2015, spanned across seven countries: Singapore, Australia, New Zealand,
Kampuchea (Cambodia), Thailand (Bangkok),
China (Shangai and Hong Kong) and Indonesia
(Bali, Jogjakarta and Jakarta). Accompanying
Pujya Mahant Swami were Rajendra Swami,
Aksharkirtan Swami, Adarshswarup Swami,
Shrutipriya Swami and Munichintan Swami.
They were also joined by Paramchintan Swami
and Adarshmuni Swami, who travel all the year
round in the Asia-Pacafic countries. The high -
lights of the satsang vicharan were two murti-
pratishtha ceremonies, satsang assemblies, shi-
birs, cultural programmes, parayans and kirtan
The vicharan report in brief is as follows.
After a one-day halt at Singapore on 1 April,
Pujya Mahant Swami and sant mandal arrived
at Perth on 2 April. On 3 and 4 April a two-day satsang shibir , 'Kariye Raji Ghanshyam', was held
for devotees. The shibir programme included
speeches on niyam -dharma, pride for satsang and
loyalty, skits, videos and Swamishri's blessings.
A kirtan bhakti evening was also attended by the
chairmen of various Indian social organizations.
On 9 April, a welcome assembly and bal-
kishore din and mahila din programmes were
held. On 11 April, the murti-pratishtha yagna
and nagar-yatra of the murtis for the newly built
hari mandir were carried out. On 12 April, Pujya
Mahant Swami performed the murti-pratishtha
rituals of the new BAPS hari mandir, during
which the premier of South Australia, Hon. Jay
Weatherill, had also attended. In the evening, a
grand cultural programme was performed by chil -
On 13 April, a one-day seminar was held for
all BAPS karyakars of Australia and New Zealand.
On 14 April, an assembly was held to felicitate
the karyakars of Adelaide.
From 17 to 18 April, a satsang shibir , 'Kariye Pujya Mahant Swami's
Kirtan bhakti in Perth Murti-pratishtha in Adelaide
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 51Raji Ghanshyam', was attended by 620 devotees.
Simultaneously, a shibir for balaks and balikas
was held on the theme 'My Mandir, My Home'.
On 19 April, a seminar on 'Manage Yourself'
was held for youths, in which 300 youths partici -
pated. From 19 to 22 April, Pujya Mahant Swami
held a parayan on 'Purushottam Boliya Prite'.
On 25 April, a cultural programme was held
in the presence of Pujya Mahant Swami. On 26
April, the kalalsh-dhaja mahotsav of the hari
mandir was held. In addition, bal-yuva shibirs
On 29 April, Pujya Mahant Swami and the
sant mandal arrived in Auckland. A welcome as -
sembly was held at the BAPS Swaminarayan hari
30 April-2 May, Rotorua
On 1 May, a kirtan bhakti programme and
a sagar-yatra (boat-procession) were held. On
the next day Pujya Mahant Swami performed
the murti-pratishtha rituals at the new BAPS
hari mandir, during which Mayor Stephanie
Chadwick, MP Todd McClay and other digni -
Satsang assemblies were held in Hamilton.
Mahant Swami performs the murti-pratishtha, Rotorua
Group photo after the shibir 'My Mandir, My Home', Sydney
Mahant Swami performs pujan of mandir kalash, Melbourne
Mahant Swami blesses a satsang assembly, Rotorua'Kariye Raji Ghanshyam' shibir, Sydney
52 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 20153-9 May, Auckland
Satsang shibirs, parayans and a cultural event
Satsang shibirs , parayans and a cultural event
On 15 May, Pujya Mahant Swami blessed the
Yogi Jayanti celebration in Wellington. A kirtan
bhakti programme was held during the Sunday satsang sabha .
A welcome assembly, sant parayan and satsang
On 20 May, a satsang picnic (dabra utsav ) and
kirtan bhakti programme were held at Gold Coast.
On 23 and 24 May, a cultural event and Pramukh
Varni Din celebrations were held in Brisbane.
Pujya Mahant Swami blessed satsang assem -
blies and the sant mandal performed a kirtan
bhakti programme.27 May-1 June, Singapore
Pujya Mahant Swami performed the mahapuja
rituals to sanctify a hall purchased for conducting
the weekly satsang assembly. On 31 May, many
Balaks perform in satsang assembly, Brisbane Satsang assembly, Christchurch
Kirtan bhakti programme, Darwin
Mahapuja rituals in a satsang hall, Singapore
Satsang assembly, Hong Kong
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 53dignitaries and devotees attended the welcome
assembly to honour Pujya Mahant Swami and
1-3 June, Kampuchea (Cambodia)
Pujya Mahant Swami and the sant mandal vis-
ited the Angor Wat and other ancient mandirs
3-7 June, Bangkok (Thailand)
Satsang and morning parayans were held
8-15 June, Hong Kong
A parayan in Hindi was held and the first pa-
totsav of the BAPS hari mandir was celebrated in
Pujya Mahant Swami's presence.
9-10 June, ChinaA satsang assembly was held in Shanghai and
Pujya Mahant Swami and sant mandal visited the
Buddha temple in Wunshi.
A satsang assembly was held at a well-wisher's
19-20 June, Jogjakarta and Jakarta
A one-day parayan was held.
Pujya Mahant Swami and the sant mandal re-
turned to New Delhi on 21 June.
In summary, the 80-day vicharan included
seven shibirs, two leadership seminars, two murti-
pratishtha ceremonies, inauguration of a satsang
sabha in Shanghai, padhramanis and personal
As instructed by Bhagwan Swaminarayan in the
Shikshapatri and by the wish of Pramukh Swami
Maharaj, devotees should undertake extra spiritual observances during the four holy months of chaturmas .
This year chaturmas is from Ashadh sud 11 (27 July
2015) to Kartak sud 11 (22 November 2015). To please
Bhagwan Swaminarayan and Pramukh Swami Maharaj, the following extra observances should be undertaken:
1. One month dharna-parna , chandrayan , etc. or ek-
tana during the month of Shravan (15 August to
2. Extra malas, dandvats, pradakshinas as per one's
3. Daily read one extra Vachanamrut and five Swami-ni Vato. 4. Reading, for elder devotees: 'Bhagwan Swaminarayan Jivancharitra', Parts 1 and 2; 'Brahmasannidhi 2013'
5. Reading, for Youths: 'Jivan Pari-mal' and 'Sarvopari Bhagwan Swami-narayan' (Note: 'Brahmasannidhi 2013' will be available in BAPS bookstalls after Janmashtmi)
6. In accordance with the wish of senior sadhus lis -
ten to 'Pramukh Swami Maharaj's Amrutvani', Samput 3 or 4.
7. Inspire five people to give up addictions, attend satsang sabha and conduct a daily ghar sabha .
Note: During Chaturmas, devotees should not eat brinjals, white and red radish, sugarcane and mogri .27 July to 22 November 2015CHATURMAS NIYAMS(Contd. from pg. 49)
On several occasions while flying at night, with
nothing but the vast sky and myriad stars, I've had
darshan of Shriji Maharaj and Pramukh Swami
Maharaj showering flower petals in the night sky.
I consider myself blessed for the divine darshan
and for the fact that they are always with me.
Whenever my schedules permit I go for darshan
at the BAPS mandir in Nairobi and also meet the sadhus. I believe satsang protects one from vices and gives confidence, focus and the enthusiasm to do one's duties properly. Over the years I've
realized the benefits of satsang and following
niyams . In addition, I believe that having a bona
fide guru enables one to weather the storms of life and live a meaningful spiritual life. I am
greatly indebted to Bhagwan Swaminarayan, guru
Pramukh Swami Maharaj and his sadhus. u

54 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 20153, Friday
Swamishri gave Nirmalbhai sadhak the parshad
diksha and re-named him as Dashrath Bhagat. Prior
to the final diksha rituals a mahapuja was held in a
Yagnapurush Mandapam (assembly hall).
Swamishri performed the murti-pratishtha rit-
uals of arti and mantra-pushpanjali of the murtis
for the newly built BAPS hari mandirs in Poshina
and Hatharva villages (Sabarkantha district).
Swamishri touched the suvarna shalaka (gold-
tipped ritual stick) on each of the murtis and in-
fused the presence of the Divine. Thereafter, he
Swamishri performed the murti-pratishtha rit-
uals of arti and mantra-pushpanjali of the murtis
for the newly built BAPS hari mandir in Biliya
(Mahesana district) and of murtis which will re-
place the existing murtis at the BAPS hari man-
dir in Samoj (Atladra region). Swamishri blessed
Swamishri inaugurated a drama DVD, Kuldipak ,
produced by the BAPS Children's Central Activity
Cell and published by Swaminarayan Aksharpith.
The DVD portrays parent-teenage relations on
the central theme of inculcating spiritual values
Swamishri performed the murti-pratishtha
rituals of arti and mantra-pushpanjali of mur-
tis for the newly built BAPS hari mandir at the
Akshar-Purushotttam Chhatralaya (APC) and
murtis for the new BAPS hari mandir in Ambardi
(Gadhada region). Thereafter, Swamishri blessed the devotees.
th Patotsav of Sarangpur Mandir
After the mangala arti at 6.00 a.m. senior sad -
hus commenced performing the patotsav rituals
amidst the singing of Vedic mantras and abhishek
of the murtis .
About 8.00 a.m. Swamishri arrived for
Thakorji's darshan at the mandir. After doing dar -
shan Swamishri performed panchamrut abhishek
of the chal murtis of Shri Akshar-Purushottam
Maharaj. Thereafter, Swamishri gave darshan to
sadhus and devotees at Pramukh Darshan Vatika.
From 3.30 to 4.30 p.m. the patotsav mahapu -
ja was held in the presence of senior sadhus in
the Yagnapurush Mandapam. At 4.30 p.m. the celebration assembly commenced at Pramukh
Darshan Vatika. The programme highlights were
n Speech: Atmatrupt Swami talked about the
April 2015, SarangpurPramukh Swami maharaj 'S
Swamishri inaugurates a drama DVD, Kuldipak
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 55glory of Sarangpur mandir and the initial
n Speech: Aksharcharan Swami talked about
the challenges and difficulties faced during
n Drama: Youths of Botad Satsang mandal
enacted the difficult times during the con -
n Audio: An audio blessing of Yogiji Maharaj
narrating the situation during construction of Sarangpur mandir was relayed.
n Speech: Narayanmuni Swami talked about
the feelings of sadhus and devotees in -
volved in the mandir construction.
n Speech: Pujya Kothari Bhaktipriya Swami
elaborated on how everyone could repay their debt to Shastriji Maharaj for building
n Speech : Pujya Ghanshyamcharan Swami
talked about the history and progress of
the mandir after its consecration.
n Speech: Pujya Viveksagar Swami talked
about the staunch faith of the BAPS gurus.
n Speech: Pujya Mahant Swami talked about
how everyone should celebrate the mandir centenary celebrations.
At 7.00 p.m. Swamishri arrived in the celebra -
tion assembly. He was welcomed with the sounds of jais, blowing of conch shells and festive mu -
sic. Youths waved BAPS flags and performed a welcome dance on the bhajan, "Mandir Shatabdi Mahotsav je Sarangpur ujav " Thereafter
youths performed a drama on the "Glory of
Sarangpur". At 7.20 p.m. Swamishri inaugurat -
ed the Sarangpur centenary celebrations logo on an ipad. Then Swamishri graced all the devotees
from the main stage.
Students of the Vidyamandir in Sarangpur per -
formed a traditional dance on the shatabdi theme
bhajan. This was followed by brilliant displays highlighting various programmes to be held as
part of the mandir centenary year: anti-addic -
tion campaign, maha-annakat, yagna for world
peace, jnan-satra parayans , mandir darshan yatra,
padyatra, medical camps, blood donation camps,
cultural programmes, tree-planting drive, bhakti-
yagna , cleanliness programmes, a procession in
Botad and a grand celebration of Swamishri's 95
In conclusion, arti was collectively performed
by all and a traditional dance was presented by
the youths of Bhavnagar Satsang mandal.
Swamishri performed the murti-pratishtha ritu-
als of the murti of Ghanshyam Maharaj to be in -
stalled at the BAPS hari mandir in Detroit (USA).
Swamishri placed his thumb on the chest of the
murti and then offered sweet items as thal. u
(T ranslation of excerpts from Swamishri's
daily report in Gujarati)
Swamishri participates in a yagna ritual as part of the
launching of the Shatabdi Celebrations of Sarangpur mandirSwamishri presides over the launching of the Shatabdi
56 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
Bhersam (District: Bharuch), 15-16 January 2015
Pramukh Swami Maharaj had previously vis-
ited and sanctified Bhersam and with regular vis -
its by sadhus from the BAPS Mandir in Bharuch,
Shri Manubhai generously donated his land
to build a mandir, which was completed in
On 15 January over 200 yajmans participated
in a Yagna for World Peace. In the afternoon,
the murtis were paraded in a grand nagar-yatra
On 3 May 2014, Swamishri had previ -
ously performed the Vedic murti-pratishtha
rituals of the murtis. And on 16 January 2015,
Ghanshyamcharan Swami ritually installed the murtis in the new mandir.
Hatharva (District: Sabarkantha), 19-20 April 2015
Since Pramukh Swami Maharaj's visit to
Hatharva in 1982, satsang has steadily grown.
Shri Hasmukhbhai Patel donated land to build a
new BAPS mandir, which was completed in 11
On 15 April 2015, Pramukh Swami Maharaj
had performed the Vedic murti-pratishtha rituals in
Sarangpur of the murtis for the new hari mandir.
Then, on 19 April, the murtis were taken in a
grand nagar-yatra through the town.
On the morning of 20 April, a Yagna for World
Peace was held and then Bhaktipriya (Kothari)
Swami ritually consecrated the murtis in the new
Magnaad (District: Jambusar), 22-23 April 2015
On 22 April 2015, over 200 devotees partici -
pated in the Vedic Yagna for World Peace. In the
afternoon, the murtis were devoutly paraded in
a grand nagar-yatra through the town.
Previously, on 14 October 2014, Pramukh
Swami Maharaj had performed the Vedic murti-pratishtha rituals of the murtis for the new hari
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 57
mandir. On 23 April 2015, these murtis were
ritually consecrated in the new hari mandir by
Pujya T yagvallabh Swami.
Koyli (District: Vadodara), 24-25 April 2015
On Maghshar sud 10, Samvat 1974 (23
December 1917), Shastriji Maharaj was honoured
in a nagar-yatra on a decorated elephant by the
The town of Koyli has also been blessed by
the frequent visits of Yogiji Maharaj and Pramukh
To commemorate the opening of the newly
built BAPS hari mandir here, over 375 yajman
couples participated in a Yagna for World Peace
on 24 April 2015. Thereafter, in the afternoon, a
grand nagar-yatra of the murtis was held through
the main streets of the town.
Previously, on 14 October 2014, Pramukh
Swami Maharaj had performed the Vedic murti-
pratishtha rituals of the murtis for the new hari
On 25 April 2015, these murtis were ritu -
ally consecrated in the new hari mandir by Pujya
Amlad (District: Taloda, Khandesh), 25-26
To mark the opening of the newly built BAPS
hari mandir, 220 devotees participated in a Yagna
for World Peace on 25 April 2015.
In the afternoon a grand nagar-yatra of the
murtis , seated on six decorated floats, took place
through the town's main streets.
Previously, on 20 January 2014, Pramukh
Swami Maharaj had performed the Vedic murti-
pratishtha rituals of the murtis .
On 26 April 2015, these murtis were ritu -
ally consecrated in the new hari mandir by Pujya
Vidyanagar, 25-26 April 2015
Vallabh Vidyanagar is renowned throughout
Gujarat as an excellent academic centre. Shastriji
Maharaj, Yogiji Maharaj and Pramukh Swami Maharaj have all sanctified the city on countless
In 1945, Yogiji Maharaj had expressed his
wish of establishing a 'Brahmavidya College'. He
regularly visited students here and began a regular satsang sabha which was held at the Ramkrishna
Mission Hall and, on some occasions, at the V .P .
Thereafter, on the land donated by Shri
Ambalalbhai (Kalyan Yojna), Yogiji Maharaj began
the building of a students' hostel on 27 April 1964.
On 20 June 1965, Yogiji Maharaj inaugu -
rated the hostel. Then on 7 August 1967, Yogiji
Maharaj performed the murti-pratishtha of a new
BAPS hari mandir adjacent to the hostel.
Subsequently, on 7 December 1993, Pramukh
Swami Maharaj inaugurated a new hari mandir
To cater for the continued expansion of the
hostel, and the increased number of resident stu -
dents, a new hari mandir has been built.
The Vedic murti-pratishtha rituals of the
murtis for this new hari mandir were performed
by Pramukh Swami Maharaj on 20 April 2015
On 25 April, a Yagna for World Peace was
held and on 26 April, Pujya T yagvallabh Swami
ritually consecrated the new murtis in the new
Biliya (District: Patan), 23-24 April 2015
Decades ago, distinguished devotees Maganlal
58 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
and Ambalal - who were disciples of Bhagatji
Maharaj - frequently visited the village of Biliya to establish satsang.
Years later, in 1980, BAPS sadhus visited the
town in the build-up to Bhagwan Swaminarayan's bicentenary celebrations. Satsang was consolidat -
ed and flourished with continued visits by the sadguru and other sadhus.
Subsequently, with the efforts of Chhagan
Shivram's family and other devotees, the mandir
was built. They were enthusiastically supported by
other town residents, who despite having relocated
to Surat, came in groups of 15 to stay for two weeks
at a time and help in building the hari mandir.
Prior to the murti-pratishtha , from 17 to 23
April, a parayan was conducted by Prabhucharan
Swami, which was attended daily by around
On 23 April, 850 yajmans participated in a
Yagna for World Peace, seated around 101 yagna
kunds . In the afternoon the murtis to be installed
were taken on a nagar-yatra through the town.
Pramukh Swami Maharaj had previously per -
formed the murti-pratishtha rituals of the murtis
on 16 April 2015 in Sarangpur.
On the morning of 24 April, these murtis were
ritually consecrated in the new hari mandir by
Samoj (District: Jambusar), 24-25 May 2015
Samoj has been sanctified by the visits of
Shastriji Maharaj, Yogiji Maharaj and Pramukh
Swami Maharaj. Satsang was established and
Pramukh Swami Maharaj consecrated a hari
mandir here on 18 February 2005.
As part of the mandir's 10th anniversary cel -
ebrations, new murtis were consecrated. Over
300 yajmans participated in a Yagna for World
Peace on 24 May 2015. In the afternoon, the new
murtis were taken in a grand nagar-yatra.
Previously, on 16 April 2015, Swamishri had
performed the Vedic murti-pratishtha rituals of
the new murtis , and on 25 May, T yagvallabh
Swami ritually consecrated the new murtis in the
Dhulia, Maharashtra, 28-30 May 2015
Over 450 BAPS devotees attended the three-
day shibir in the presence of Dr Swami.
Based on the theme 'Yagnapurush Sukhkari',
the devotees were inspired to progress spiritually by learning about the life and work of Shastriji Maharaj. The shibir featured speeches, skits, au-
dio-visual presentations, question-answer sessions and other inspiring activities.
GOVERNOR OF GUJARAT VISITS AKSHAR
Gondal, India, 16 April 2015
The Governor of Gujarat, H.E. O.P . Kohli vis -
ited Akshar Mandir, Gondal. At the Akshar Deri,
Divyapurush Swami welcomed the Governor by applying a kumkum chandlo on his forehead,
tying a nada-chhadi on his wrist and garland -
ing him, while students from the BAPS gurukul
chanted Vedic mantras. The sadhus prayed for
the Governor's good health and success. They
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 59
explained the glory and importance of the Akshar
Deri and the significance of performing pradak-
shinas here. Thereafter, the Governor performed
circumambulations around the Akshar Deri.
Then, the Governor had darshan of all three shrines of the main mandir and performed arti
of Shri Ghanshyam Maharaj.
Best Friend Forever: Books
Gujarat & Mumbai, India, 27 April -7 May 2015
During the summer vacations, over 15,350
yuvaks and yuvatis participated in the annual one-
day yuva shibirs, which were held at 21 BAPS
centres in Gujarat and Mumbai.
The shibir theme, 'Best Friend Forever:
Books', focused on reading as a life-long friend,
whose companionship should be developed and strengthened.
Through inspiring speeches by senior, experi -
enced and learned sadhus, specially scripted theme-
oriented skits, quizzes, theme-related games and
activities, and discussions, the youths learnt the
importance of reading good books and articles for their personal, professional and spiritual progress. The youths were also encouraged to appear for the annual Satsang Examinations, since this would help them develop a better and deeper understanding of satsang history, traditions, prin -
India, 1-31 May 2015
Approximately 5,500 BAPS Children's Wing
volunteers visited more than 45,000 children and their families over one month to person -
ally motivate children in studies and satsang and
to meet their families. This Bal Sampark Yagna
took place in 4,200 bal and balika mandals
across Gujarat and in major cities across India.
At each home, the volunteers spoke to the fami-lies about their personal satsang and spent time
with the children and parents to help the children improve in their studies. Each family was also
shown a short video to help increase the chil -
To conclude the visit, each child was given a
'Goal Card,' on which the child set study targets
for the year. Afterwards, the volunteers and the family prayed together for the child's success.
Theme: 'Eni Rite Reet' - 'His Way'
Sarangpur, 22-24 May 2015
Over 1,750 yuvaks and yuvatis from Vadodara
and Bharuch gathered in Sarangpur for this spe -
cial 3-day shibir , which Pramukh Swami Maharaj
inaugurated by lighting the divo.
Based on the theme 'Eni Rite Reet' - 'His Way'
60 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015
- the shibir revealed to the youths that the way
of the Satpurush is the most ideal path to follow
in life to experience peace, stability and fulfill -
ment. The youths learnt that the spiritual values
taught by the Satpurush enable them to tackle
Topics such as the all-doership of God, divin-
ity of God, daily personal puja, daily satsang read -
ing, observing niyams and dharma, appropriate
use of mobiles and internet, preserving traditions
and others were presented to the youths through
speeches by senior and experienced sadhus,
audio-visual presentations, skits, and question-
answer sessions. An evening session of bhajans was also presented by the sadhus.
The highlight of the shibir was the regular
darshan of Swamishri throughout the three days.
At the conclusion of the shibir , the youths
pledged to strengthen their satsang and obser -
vance of niyams .
India, 31 May & 7 June 2015
A Satsang Reading Competition was or -
ganized across Gujarat in which youths par -
ticipated in two groups based on age: 14-18 years - Nilkanth and 19-27 years - Sahajanand. Youths in the Nilkanth group were tested on
'Kishore Satsang Prarambha' and youths in
the Sahajanand group were tested on 'Kishore
The competition involved three parts: (a) writ -
ten test (b) oral and (c) prasang narration (one for
Nilkanth group and two for Sahajanand). Youths
were ranked according to their total scores.
The competitions were held separately for yu-
vaks and yuvatis in two phases. First, on 31 May
2015, 6,650 yuvaks-yuvatis at 70 BAPS centres
participated in the kshetriya (regional) competi-
tions. Based on their performance, yuvaks and
yuvatis from each region were selected to com-
pete in the next phase. In the second phase, on
7 June 2015, 4,800 yuvaks-yuvatis competed at
28 centres in the antar-kshetriya (inter-regional)
The intra-regional and inter-regional events
served to strengthen satsang knowledge amongst
these youngsters while also keeping alive a healthy spirit of competition.
The Hon. Luke Foley, the Leader of the
Opposition in New South Wales (NSW), Australia,
Mr Daniel Mookhey, a Member of the NSW
Legislative Council and the NSW Parliament's
first MP of Australian-Indian origin, and other del -
egates were welcomed in a traditional Indian man -
ner on their visit to Swaminarayan Akshardham.
They then went to the Mayur Dwar (Peacock
Gate), Swaminarayan Akshardham Mandir,
Gajendra Pithika (Elephant Plinth) and Sanskruti
Darshan boatride. They also offered prayers for
world peace and harmony by performing ab-
hishek on the sacred murti of Shri Neelkanth
Varni. In the evening they saw the Sahaj Anand Water Show.
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 61
Before departing, Hon. Luke Foley wrote,
"Thank you for receiving us at Swaminarayan
Akshardham and for your most gracious hospital -
ity. The memories of this wonderful special place
will stay with me forever. God bless you all."
Hon. Daniel Mookhey wrote, "The
Akshardham has meaning to all Indians including
Indians in Australia. As an Australian politician
of Hindu descent, my visit to Akshardham will
stay with me as I do my duties."
Tanzania's President Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete,
along with Tanzania's First Lady Salma Kikwete and a 50-member delegation visited Swaminarayan
After the traditional welcome, the delegation
were taken to see the Mayur Dwar, Swaminarayan
Akshardham Mandir, Gajendra Pithika, and Neelkanth Darshan and Sanskruti Darshan ex -
hibitions. In addition, they offered prayers for
world peace and harmony by performing abhishek
on the sacred murti of Shri Neelkanth Varni.
Commenting on his experience, President
Jakaya Kikwete wrote, "Thank you for the opportunity to visit this holy and marvelous place. I am short of words to express my feel -
ings. I am simply very impressed with the work that has gone into creating this temple."
BRITISH PRIME MINISTER DAVID CAMERON
London, 2 May 2015
The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister David Cameron
MP visited BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir,
London on Saturday 2 May 2015 in the run-up
to the general elections.
In his speech to the assembly after visiting
the main mandir sanctum and before meeting several of the worshippers, he said, "I go around
the country, I see our iconic buildings and statues - Stonehenge, the Angel of the North, Big Ben.
And I'll tell you what: Neasden Mandir is one of
them; one of our great British landmarks. The
first traditional Hindu temple built in Europe
wasn't in Germany, or France, or Spain. It was here in Britain - right here in Neasden - and I'm
so proud of that.
"I know this is a big year for you - the tem -
ple's 20th anniversary. I think of everything that
went into creating it: the 3,000 tons of Bulgarian
limestone, the 1,200 tons of Italian marble, the
1,500 sculptors in India, the countless hours of
volunteering by young and old. It really was a
labour of love - and it really is a thing of beauty,
a marvel. And I know the celebrations here this
summer will be equally spectacular. The swamis
62 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015and trustees here certainly know how to organize
the best show in town.
"You know, I come here, and there's a lot that
stands out - the dedication of the volunteers, the
music, the dance and language classes, the sheer
size of the congregation. But for me what stands
out most is this: the values. British Hindu values."
The Prime Minister concluded by saying, "I
want to end by sharing some personal ambitions
with you. I want to visit some of the temples you
are building in America. I want to see your iconic
Akshardham monument in Delhi - I haven't got
round to visiting yet, but I will definitely make it there."
BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir London, UK, 10 May 2015
As part of the Mandir's 20th anniversary cel -
ebrations, many events have been organized to
thank various groups of people for their contin-
ued support and commitment.
Central to its establishment and various on -
going activities has been the dedicated support
of elderly volunteers. Thus, a special event was
organized at the Mandir to celebrate their ef -
forts in helping build the Mandir over 20 years
ago and to appreciate their dedicated services to this day.
Upon arrival, each guest had a photograph
taken with the Mandir in the backdrop, which was
later gifted to them as a memento of their visit.
The senior volunteers were then entertained
by musicians, comedians, a colourful dance, vari -
ous games and presentations, and a magic show,
before being treated to a sumptuous vegetar -
Sadhus and trustees of the Mandir also offered
their personal notes of appreciation, thanking
everyone for their invaluable contribution over
The event was thoroughly enjoyed by all and
many gave their personal testimonies.NEIGHBOURS APPRECIATION DAY
BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir
London, UK, 21 May 2015
BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir in London
has fostered a profound sense of community spirit since its inauguration in August 1995.
As part of the 20th anniversary celebrations,
more than 150 local residents, including repre -
sentatives from the three local schools, businesses
(including IKEA, Tesco and Europcar), staff at
the nearby health centre, clergy from the local
churches, and the neighbourhood police were
invited to the Mandir.
Guests were welcomed and personally looked
after by a team of dedicated volunteers. Upon ar -
rival, each had their photograph taken with the
Mandir in the backdrop. This photo was later
presented to them as a memento of their visit.
The visitors enjoyed a special guided tour
which included an exhibition explaining the vari -
ous activities organized by the Mandir. After a
video about the Mandir's making and its current
role as a hub of community services, everyone was again thanked by the Board of Trustees for
their years of support and friendship, stretching
back over 33 years in some cases.
A sumptuous vegetarian meal followed dur -
ing which neighbours shared more of their per -
sonal experiences of living near the 'Neasden
Temple'. They departed with a greater under -
standing of the Mandir's local, national and in -
ternational contributions and a deeper sense of
pride and appreciation for this iconic building in their neighbourhood.
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 63One of the residents later shared: "Thank you
for a wonderful evening. You made us all feel very
special and part of your community. Everyone we
met could not do enough for us and appeared
happy that we were with you all. The Mandir is
an amazing place, one of the most beautiful places
I have ever seen."
Edinburgh, Scotland, 3 May 2015
More than 60 adults and 20 children gathered
at Stoneyhill Community Centre in Edinburgh, Scotland for an enlightening one-day family shi-
bir in the presence of sadhus from BAPS Shri
The programme was titled 'My Family, My
Satsang', which explored practical methods of developing harmony and understanding between family members.
The content was delivered through insightful
discourses from sadhus and creative multimedia
presentations. Younger children were also educat -
ed through specially tailored activities and games.
In addition, the shibir included a family team-
building activity, family discussions in which
they shared their thoughts and learning experi -
ences, and a question and answer session with
The attendees also learnt about Pramukh
Swami Maharaj's principles and guidelines for family unity.
At the end the participants pledged to im -
bibe these teachings to strengthen their fam -
ily harmony.FAMILY HARMONY SEMINARS
UK, 18-19 April 2015
As part of the on-going 20th anniversary
celebrations of London Mandir, three seminars
fostering family harmony were organized around
the UK in the presence of sadhus from India, including Pujya Ishwarcharan Swami.
The seminars were held at the BAPS Swami -
narayan mandirs in London and Leicester on Saturday, 18 April and in Manchester on
Sunday, 19 April 2015. They aimed to bring
families closer together by helping to improve
communication, enhance understanding and
Each day-long seminar featured insightful
speeches, video presentations, family discussions and teambuilding activities, a family photograph
session, interactive discussions tailored for differ -
ent age groups, and video blessings from Pramukh
Swami Maharaj and senior sadhus.
Ishwarcharan Swami spoke of the importance
of mutual understanding, patience, flexibility
and tolerance as the bedrock of a sturdy fam -
He emphasized that an open mind and a for -
giving heart are essential to keeping family rela -
tionships firm and healthy.
Swamishri's video blessings reinforced the
messages imbibed throughout the day providing
a fitting conclusion to each highly educational and inspiring seminar.
Over 1,100 such individuals benefitted from
the three seminars in the UK.
64 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015KISHORE DIN AND RETREAT
Paris, France, 28 April-1 May 2015
More than 450 devotees gathered at Espace
Noisy Le Sec, Paris for an enlightening Kishore
Din that lucidly explored the positive impact
of Satsang in Paris through an informative pro -
gramme of creative videos, insightful dramas and lively devotional songs.
The programme began with the arrival of Shri
Harikrishna Maharaj, who was adorned in beauti -
ful hand-made French attire and accessories, and
welcomed by traditional French accordion music.
This was followed by a vibrant traditional
dance and devotional singing. A series of sketches
supported by videos illustrated the benefits of
satsang to the local communities in Paris.
Sadhus discussed the unity and dedication
of youths, sharing inspiring accounts of how Swamishri and satsang have improved their lives.
The visit also included a teambuilding trip to
Normandy, North-West France, where the youths
participated in a number of devotional and other
Adelaide, Australia, 13 April 2015
At the new BAPS hari mandir in Adelaide,
karyakars from throughout Australia and New
Zealand attended the National Leadership
Seminar in the presence Pujya of Mahant Swami. The karyakars were guided on how to carry out
their duties according to Swamishri's wishes. They were also guided on how to strengthen their personal satsang and practise it in their daily lives.
Theme: 'Siddhantam' - 'Principles'
East and South Africa, 4 to 26 April 2015
A total of over 800 BAPS satsang activities vol -
unteers from centres in Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Malawi, Congo, Botswana,
Rwanda, Burundi, South Sudan and Madagascar
participated in the four Annual Karyakar Shibirs
held in Jinja, Uganda; Nairobi, Kenya; Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania; and Lenasia, South Africa.
Based on the theme 'Siddhantam', each shibir
was presented in four parts.
The first part focused on developing pride
for the siddhant (principle), in which the karya-
kars learnt about the Vedic roots of the Akshar-
Purushottam doctrine. The second part demon -
strated that it is this doctrine which helps to resolve
the many problems which arise in one's day-to-
day life. The third part revealed how the Gunatit guru parampara have enthusiastically lived by and
propagated this doctrine. In the fourth part, the karyakars were taught that to gain a true working
knowledge of the doctrine, one must profoundly
associate with the manifest Satpurush.
The shibirs included speeches by learned and
experienced sadhus, skits, audio-visual presenta-
tions, group discussions, question-answer sessions and teambuilding activities.
Through these shibirs, the karyakars
July-August 2015 u Swaminarayan Bliss 65consolidated their understanding of the Akshar-
Purushottam doctrine and resolved to imbibe it
in their daily lives.
BAPS CHARITIES SUPPORTING KISUTU GIRLS
Tanzania, 12 March 2015
BAPS Charities donated funds to the Kisutu
Girls Secondary School for the year's school fees
and uniforms for 68 underprivileged students.
BAPS Charities supports the school in vari -
ous ways throughout the year. In addition to this
donation, BAPS Charities has committed to sup-
porting the students' further education through
scholarships and grants. Additionally, chairs for
the school library were also donated.
BAPS CHARITIES FOOD DRIVES
Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania, April 2015
During April 2015, BAPS Charities in Tanzania
donated over half a metric ton of food and sup-
plies to the following charitable organizations:
Children's Retention Home - run by the
Tanzanian government, it helps to rehabilitate
children and prepare them for re-entry into so-
ciety as productive individuals.
Help2Kids Orphanage - run by Help2kids
International, a Swiss NGO that operates in Africa, the orphanage provides housing, educa -
tion, food, healthcare, and a family environment to grow up in. The goal of the NGO is to help
the children break the cycle of poverty, and live productive lives.
Salvation Army Matumaini is a home and
school for 200 physically disabled children, aged
between from 3 to 17. The children are provided
education to help them progress in their lives,
ANNUAL WALKATHON - KARURA FOREST
Nairobi, 24 May 2015
Around 450 walkers aged between 5 and
85 years participated in the Inaugural Annual
Walkathon organized by BAPS Charities at the
Karura Forest to collect funds to plant 10,000 trees in 2015. In 2014, BAPS Charities planted
7,000 trees and in 2013, 3,000 trees.
BAPS Charities chose to hold the Annual
Walkathon at Karura Forest as it plays a signifi -
cant role in the conservation of trees and forests
WINTER WARMER DRIVE 2015
Lenasia, South Africa, 30 May 2015
The aim of the drive is to donate clothes,
blankets, hot meals and non-perishable food
and household items to underprivileged and

66 Swaminarayan Bliss u July-August 2015impoverished communities in preparation for the
As part of its annual Winter Warmer Drive
BAPS Charities donated 50 boxes of clothing,
four months' worth of nutritious non-perishable
vegetarian food, building ware and household
appliances required for daily feeding and mainte -
nance to Phuthamahae Community Care Givers, a non-profit organization in the informal settle -
ment of Orange Farm, outside Johannesburg, that
serves orphans, vulnerable children and child-
headed families with daily necessities and also
serves as a day care facility. Volunteers also served
hot meals and spent quality time with the chil -
dren, interacting with them and bringing a smile
to their faces. u
Dr Kantibhai C. Patel
was a dedicated pio -
neer of BAPS satsang in
America and through his
selfless service and de -
vout life, he had earned the innermost blessings
of Yogiji Maharaj and
Born in 1934 and a native of Porda village, he
gained an MSc in Chemistry from Sardar Patel University and a PhD in Organic Chemistry from
London. During his time in London, he was drawn
by the spirituality of Yogiji Maharaj. In 1970, at
Heathrow Airport, Yogiji Maharaj instructed
him to go to America to further his career and
said, "Go to New York and establish a mandir;
promote satsang to all in America." When K.C.
Patel requested Yogiji Maharaj to visit America,
he replied, "Pramukh Swami Maharaj will come
to America and perform the mandir pratishtha. "
With Yogiji Maharaj's blessings, he furthered
his career as a professor in Brooklyn College.
In 1970, four sadhus led by T yagvallabh Swami
visited America and formally established the BAPS satsang there. Among the pioneer devotees were
Dr K.C. Patel, Shri Bhagubhai Patel, Shri Kunjbhai
Shah and others.From 1971 onwards, Pramukh Swami Maharaj
regularly wrote letters to inspire them and the satsang office was set up. With the blessings of
Pramukh Swami Maharaj, Dr K.C. Patel served
as the president of America Satsang Mandal from
Guided by Swamishri, he endeavoured to es -
tablish hari mandirs throughout America. In 1991,
as part of Yogiji Maharaj's centenary celebrations, the Cultural Festival of India and Swamishri's
platinum tula was celebrated in America, during
which Dr K.C. Patel offered his heartfelt services.
He travelled thousands of miles across
America, enduring many hardships to seek out aspirants and encourage them to join satsang. He
dedicated his life to setting up BAPS centres and
mandirs, and managing and streamlining other
Dr K.C. Patel was a decisive leader, with
firm, undivided nishtha , who totally surrendered
his life at the feet of guruhari Pramukh Swami
Maharaj. His contributions to the growth and organization of satsang in America are matchless
He also instilled such dedicated service and
devotion in his sons and other family members.
His departure is a great loss to the BAPS. SAD DEMISE OF SHRI DR K.C. PATEL

21 May 2015, Sarangpur
On the occasion of Swamishri's 66th Pramukh Varni Din, he initiated 14 youths into the parshad -fold and 2 parshads
1. Initia tes perform the diksha mahapuja rituals .
2. S wamishri blesses one of the new sadhus.
3. Sadhus and de votees rejoice during the diksha ceremony.
4. S wamishri presides over the diksha ceremony.
5. Ne wly initiated parshads with Swamishri.1

"Swaminarayan Bliss", July-August 2015. Published on 5/7/15 Posted at Ahmedabad, P.S.O. 5th on Bi-Monthly, RNI- 33411/79
Printed and Published by Sadhu Swayamprakashdas on behalf of Swaminarayan Aksharpith and Printed at Swaminarayan Mudran Mandir, Shahibaug Road,
Ahmedabad - 380 004 and Published from Swaminarayan Aksharpith, Shahibaug Road, Ahmedabad - 380 004. Editor: Sadhu Swayamprakashdas.
28 June 2015, Ahmedabad
Top: Distinguished guests with the
sadguru sadhus on stage during the
Left: Exterior view of the celebration
venue - Gujarat University Convention &
Bottom: Invited dignitaries and guests
in the auditorium enjoy the celebration programme.

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2018 with funding from
Dr. APJ ABDUL KALAM
Dr. APJ ABDUL KALAM
JANUARY 2004 - DECEMBER 2005
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING
First Edition : 2010 (Saka 1931)
Price : Rs. 643.00
Additional Director General (In Charge),
Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
Government of India, Soochna Bhawan, CGO Complex,
Lodhi Road, New Delhi-110 003
EDITING : Dayawanti Srivastava
Cover Design : Asha Saxena
Sales Centres : Soochna Bhawan, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi-110003
Hall No. 196, Old Secretariat, Delhi-110054 * 701, B-Wing, 7th Floor, Kendriya
Sadan, Belapur, Navi Mumbai-400614 8, Esplanade East, Kolkata-700069 'A'
Wing, Rajaji Bhawan, Besant Nagar, Chennai-600090 Press Road, Near Govt.
Press, Thiruvananthapuram-695001 Block 4, 1st Floor, Gruhakalpa Complex,
M.G. Road, Nampally, Hyderabad-500001 1st Floor, 'F' Wing, Kendriya Sadan,
Koramangala, Bangaluru-560034 Bihar State Co-operative Bank Building, Ashoka
Rajpath, Patna- 800004 Hall No. 1,2nd Floor, Kendriya Bhawan, Sector H, Aliganj,
Lucknow-226024 Ambica Complex, 1st Floor, Paldi, Ahmedabad-380007 House
No. 07, New Colony, Chenikuthi, K.K.B. Road, Guwahati-781003
Typeset at: Sairam Computers, G-117/A, Vishvas Park, Uttam Nagar, New Delhi-110059
Printed at: Chandu Press, D-97, Shakarpur, Delhi-92 Ph: 22526936
1. EVOLUTION OF A BEAUTIFUL INDIA 3
Address to the Nation on the Eve of 55th Republic
Day, New Delhi, 25 January 2004
2. VOTING - A SACRED MISSION
Address to the Nation on the Occasion of the Elections
to the 14th Lok Sabha, 18 April 2004
3. EDUCATION FOR DIGNITY OF HUMAN LIFE
Address to the Nation on the Eve of 58th
Independence Day, New Delhi, 14 August 2004
4. STRENGTH OF INDIA-POST LIES IN ITS PEOPLE
Address at the Inauguration of the Sesquicentennial
Celebrations of India-Post, New Delhi, 4 October 2004
5. INNOVATION AND ITS DIMENSIONS
Address at the 3rd Annual Award Distribution Function
of National Innovation Foundation, Ahmedabad, 5
6. ACTION PLAN FOR EMPLOYMENT GENERATION
Address to the Nation on the Eve of 56th Republic
Day, New Delhi, 25 January 2005
7. A COMMITMENT TO A CARING POLITY
Address to Parliament, New Delhi, 25 February 2005 14

8. INNOVATION - AN ENGINE OF KNOWLEDGE SOCIETY
Speech while Presenting the Indian Innovation
Awards 2005, New Delhi, 7 March 2005
9. DISCOVERING INDIA - DYNAMICS OF TRAVEL AND
Address at the Inauguration of the 5th Global Travel
and Tourism Summit, New Delhi, 8 April 2005
10. EMPLOYMENT GENERATION FOR RURAL
Address at the Inauguration of the National Summit
of Rural NGOs of India, New Delhi, 25 April 2005
11. PROVIDING WATER TO EVERY CITIZEN OF THE
Inaugural Address at the National Water Convention
2005, New Delhi, 11 May 2005
12. ONGC - FUELLING THE ECONOMY OF THE NATION
Address at the Golden Jubilee Celebration of
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd., Dehradun,
13. ENERGY INDEPENDENCE BY THE YEAR 2030
Address to the Indian Institute of Petroleum,
Dehradun, 14 August 2005
14. TAKE GREEN TECH TO THE PEOPLE
Address at the Inauguration of Green Building
Congress 2005, New Delhi, 15 September 2005
15. E-GOVERNANCE TO BE CITIZEN-FRIENDLY
Address at the Inauguration of e-Governance Portal
at Rashtrapati Bhavan, New Delhi, 13 October 2005
16. STRENGTHENING RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
PILLARS OF DEMOCRACY 132
Address at the National Conference on Legal
Empowerment on the occasion of National Legal
Literacy Day, New Delhi, 9 November 2005
17. PURA - AN INSTRUMENT FOR DEVELOPMENT 139
Address at the Presentation of the Indira Gandhi prize
for Peace, Disarmament and Development 2004, New
Delhi, 19 November 2005
18. SOLUTIONS FOR A TRANSPARENT SOCIETY 142
Address during the Inauguration of the Regional
Conference of the South Asian Chapters of
Transparency International India, New Delhi,
1. TOURISM INDUSTRY - PROSPECT FOR WEALTH
Address at the Inauguration of the Seminar on
Tourism, Ahmedabad, 15 October 2004
2. WOMEN EMPOWERMENT FOR A STABLE
Address at the Association of Women Entrepreneurs
of Karnataka, Bangaluru, 16 January 2004
3. KEEPING THE ENVIRONMENT CLEAN
Address at the Inauguration of India Country Level
Development Market Place, New Delhi, 21 June 2004 168
4. BANKING SECTOR - REINFORCING THE ECONOMY
Address at the Bankers' Conference 2004, New Delhi,
5. IITF - A UNIQUE BLEND OF TRADE AND TRADITION 186
Address at the Inauguration of 24th India International
Trade Fair - 2004, New Delhi, 14 November 2004
6. SECOND GREEN REVOLUTION FOR FARMERS 193
Address during the Inauguration of Symposium on
Uncommon Opportunities: A Roadmap for
Employment, Food and Global Security, New Delhi,
7. KEYS TO GAIN A COMPETITIVE EDGE 205
Address at the 25th Convocation of National Institute
of Design, Paldi, Ahmedabad, 5 January 2005
8. CRITICAL FEATURES OF PROJECT MANAGEMENT 215
Address during the Inauguration of PMI - Asia Pacific
Conference 2005 through Video Conference,
Hyderabad, 15 April 2005
9. CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS - FOR ECONOMIC
Address at the ICAI's International Conference on
Accounting Profession: Adding Value to New Horizons
of Economic Growth, New Delhi, 1 September 2005
10. AUDITING - A QUALITY ASSURANCE PHENOMENON 236
Address at the All India Conference of the Accountants
General, New Delhi, 20 September 2005
11. BHARAT NIRMAN - BUILDING INFRASTRUCTURE IN
Address at the Inauguration of the National
Workshop on "Vision 2020 - India" (PURA and Growth
Centres for Making India a Developed Nation), New
Delhi, 12 November 2005
12. TRANSFORMING VISION TO MISSIONS
Address at the Centenary Celebrations of PHD
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi,
3. HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE
1. SERVICE TO HUMAN BEING IS SERVICE TO GOD
Address at the Inauguration of the Super Speciality
and Research Block of Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, New
Delhi, 16 July 2004
2. ELIMINATION OF POLIO - A GLOBAL MISSION
Address at the Inauguration of International Polio Plus
Summit, New Delhi, 7 August 2004
3. MISSION TOWARDS HEALTHY HEARTS
Address at the Inauguration of the International Centre
for Biomedical Sciences and Technologies (Research,
Training & Applications), Chennai, 2 October 2004
4. NANO-SCIENCE TREATMENT OF CANCER AND
Address during the Presentation of Ranbaxy Research
Awards for the Years 2002 and 2003, New Delhi,
5. TECHNOLOGY BRINGS SMILES TO SPECIAL
Address at the Dedication of Polytechnic of Spastic
Society of Karnataka, Bangaluru, 5 November 2004
6. EYE CARE - A NOBLE MISSION
Address at the Inauguration of ORBIS DC-10 Flying
Eye Hospital Programme, New Delhi, 10 March 2005
7. MISSION FOR TOTAL ERADICATION OF LEPROSY 304
Address at the Annual General Meeting of Hind
Kusht Nivaran Sangh at Vishwa Yuvak Kendra, New
Delhi, 2 May 2005
8. CANCER TREATMENT: CHALLENGES 309
Address at the Sri Ramakrishna Institute of Oncology
and Research, Coimbatore, 6 July 2005
9. PROVIDING HEALTH CARE IN RURAL AREAS 313
Address at the Parumala Unit of International Centre
for Cardio Thoracic and Vascular Diseases, Parumala,
10. RANBAXY FOR INDIAN TRADITIONAL MEDICINE 317
Address at the New Research & Development Centre
of Ranbaxy, Gurgaon, 16 August 2005
11. PROVIDING EQUITABLE HEALTH CARE TO ALL 323
Address at the 9th Annual Meeting (Forum-9) of
Global Forum for Health Research, Mumbai,
12. VISION FOR ALL 334
Address at the Celebration of the World Sight Day,
Hyderabad, 15 October 2005
13. HEARING AND SPEECH FOR ALL 340
Address at the Inauguration of the 3rd Cochlear
Implant Group of India Conference, New Delhi,
14. NIMHANS FOR NEUROSCIENCES 346
Address at the 10th Convocation of National Institute
of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangaluru, 21
15. TELE-MEDICINE FOR PEOPLE IN REMOTE AREAS
Speech on the Occasion of Dr. Ida S. Scudder Oration,
Christian Medical College, Vellore, 1 December 2005
16. TRADITIONAL MEDICINE SYSTEM FOR REMOVAL
Address at the Inauguration of the Ayurveda Hospital
Complex and Interaction with the Students,
Ernakulam, Kerala, 17 December 2005
17. REHABILITATION THROUGH MODERN TECH
Address at the Swami Vivekananda National Institute
of Rehabilitation Training and Research (NIRTAR),
Cuttack, 27 December 2005
18. TWIN CHALLENGES FOR HEALTH CARE
Address at the Inauguration of the Paediatric Oncology
Department, Mahavir Cancer Sansthan, Patna,
4. EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE
1. KNOWLEDGE - PRIME MOVER OF PROSPERITY
Speech while Inaugurating the International
Conference on Digital Libraries-2004, New Delhi, 24
2. CREATIVE ART IGNITES THE MINDS
Address at The Golden Jubilee Celebrations of Lalit
Kala Akademi, New Delhi, 9 August 2004
3. ART ELEVATES THE MIND 392
Speech at the Golden Jubilee Celebrations of the
National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi, 8
4. SUCCEEDING AGAINST ESTABLISHED PATTERNS 398
Speech at The Children's Science Congress at Science
City, Ahmedabad, 5 January 2005
5. CHALLENGES FOR THE WORLD COMMUNITY 405
Address to The Students and Faculty Members of
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, 12 January

6. TOWARDS A DISEASE-FREE INDIA 413
Address at The First Convocation of King George's
Medical University, Lucknow, 14 January 2005
7. WOMANHOOD - A BEAUTIFUL CREATION OF GOD 421
Address to the Girl Children of the Capital Organized
by The National Commission for Women, New Delhi,
8. INGREDIENTS OF KNOWLEDGE SOCIETY 433
Speech at the 16th Convocation of Indira
Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi, 5 March

9. CREATIVITY ADDS BEAUTY TO HUMAN LIFE 442
Address and Interaction with School and College
Students At JNRM Auditorium, Port Blair, 5th May

10. EDUCATION WITH VALUE SYSTEM 448
Address at the 175th year Celebration of Scottish
Church Collegiate School, Kolkata, 13th July 2005
11. MUSIC - AN ELEVATING EXPERIENCE FOR ALL 455
Address during the Conferment of Sangeet Natak
Akademi Awards 2005, Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi,
12. POWER OF CREATIVITY 460
Speech while Interacting with Shillong School
Children, Raj Bhavan, Shillong, 23 September 2005
13. ENRICHING THE SOCIETY THROUGH EDUCATION 464
Speech while Interacting with the Students and
Faculty of Mizoram University, Mizoram, 24
14. VIRTUAL UNIVERSITY - FOR GLOBAL CITIZENS 469
Address to the Universities of Kolkata, Madras and
Mumbai (Through Tele-Education Delivery System)
from Rashtrapati Bhavan, 3 October 2005
15. CAPACITY BUILDING FOR ENERGY INDEPENDENCE 481
Address at the First Convocation of the
University of Petroleum and Energy Studies,
Dehradun, 16 October 2005
16. EMPOWERING THE INDIAN CRAFTS AND WEAVING
Address at the Presentation of National Awards to
Master Craftspersons and Weavers, Vigyan Bhawan,
New Delhi, 12 December 2005
17. BIHAR VISION - DEVELOPED STATE BY 2015 493
Convocation Address at Patna University, Patna,
5. SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
!. HYDROGRAPHY AND ITS MULTIDIMENSIONS 505
Address at the Golden Jubilee Celebrations of National
Hydrographic Office, Dehradun, 1 June 2004
2. AIM GREAT MISSIONS, WORK FOR THEM 511
Address at the 21st Convocation, Sambalpur
University, 4 June 2004
3. TECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL TRANSFORMATION 517
Address at the Technology Day Award Function,
Pragati Maidan, New Delhi, 30 June 2004
4. WOCKHARDT IN THE FIELD OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 524
Address at the Inauguration of Wockhardt Biotech
Park, Aurangabad, 23 September 2004
5. ENERGY CONSERVATION SOLUTIONS TO
Address at the International Conference on Energy
Conservation, Ahmedabad, 15 October 2004
6. INTERNATIONAL PARTNERSHIP IN LUNAR
Address at the International Conference on
Exploration and Utilization of Moon (ICEUM-6),
Udaipur, 23 November 2004
7. NANOTECHNOLOGY TO MAKE INDIA A TECH-
Address at the 92nd Indian Science Congress,
Ahmedabad, 5 January 2005
8. CAN INDIAN SCIENCE INSPIRE YOUTH?
Address to the Nation on Science Day 2005, New
Delhi, 28 February 2005
9. ATTRACTING YOUTH FOR CAREER IN SCIENCE
Address at the Inaguration of the Seminar
on Attracting Young people to Careers in Science,
Indian Physics Association IIT, New Delhi, 31 March

10. SPACE MISSIONS - THINKING BEYOND OUR
Address at the Symposium on Launch Vehicles : Past,
Present and Way Ahead at VSSC, Thiruvananthapuram,
11. ELECTROMAGNET SPECTRUM : FRIEND OF
Address at the Inauguration of General Assembly of
International Union of Radio Science (URSI), New
Delhi, 23 October 2005
12. GLOBAL HUMAN DEVELOPMENT CADRE FOR
Address during the Inauguration of the Global
Conference on "India R & D 2005 : The World's
Knowledge Hub of the Future", Vigyan Bhavan, New
Delhi, 7 November 2005
13. DIGITAL LIBRARY AND ITS MULTIDIMENSIONS
Address at the Dedication of State-of-the-Art Digital
Mobile Laboratory for Preservation of Heritage
Manuscripts, Bangaluru, 21 November 2005
14. ENERGY CONSERVATION : CHALLENGES
Address at the Inauguration of the National Energy
Conservation Day, New Delhi, 14 December 2005
1. MEDIA TO KNOW THE ASPIRATIONS OF THE
Address at the IPI-India Award for Excellence in
Journalism 2004, New Delhi, 6 December 2004
2. NOBILITY IN POLITICS 626
Address at the National Film Awards Function, Vigyan
Bhavan, New Delhi, 2 February 2005
3. PRESS - A PARTNER IN NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 628
Address at the Concluding Ceremony of Diamond
Jubilee Celebrations of Press Club, Kolkata, 13 July

4. ELECTRONIC CONNECTIVITY OF A BILLION
Address to the General Assembly of International
Union of Radio Science (URSI), New Delhi, 25 October
7. INDIA AND THE WORLD
SOLIDARITY MUTUAL FRIENDSHIP AND

Speech at the Banquet hosted by the President of
Tanzania, Tanzania, 11 September 2004
2. INDIA-ZANZIBAR - A COMMON LINKAGE 657
Address during the Interaction with the People of
Zanzibar, Zanzibar, 12 September 2004
3. EVOLUTION OF EMPOWERED SOCIETY
Address at Moscow State University, Moscow, 23 May
DEMOCRACY A COMMON BOND OF

Speech at the Banquet hosted by the President of
Ukraine, H.E. Mr. Viktor Yushchenko, 2 June 2005
5. INDIA-AFRICA - FOR FOCUSSED MISSIONS 668
Address at the Valedictory Function of the Conclave
on India-Africa Project Partnership 2005 "Expanding
Horizons", New Delhi, 8 November 2005
1. LEADERSHIP FOR HIGH ALTITUDE BATTLE 681
Address at the BASE CAMP, Siachen Glacier, Siachen
Sector, 2 April 2004
2. INDIAN AIR FORCE : PARTNER IN INTEGRATED
Address at the Air Force Station, Pathankot,
3. IMPROVING THE HEALTH AND EFFICIENCY OF
Address during the Inaugration of 53rd Armed Forces
Medical Research Conference (AFMC), Pune,
4. RESTORATION OF CAR NICOBAR AFTER TSUNAMI 698
Address at the Air Force Station, Car Nicobar,

Evolution of a Beautiful India
N THIS IMPORTANT day on the eve of 55th Republic Day
of India, I am indeed happy to greet all the billion citizens of our
country including those living abroad, I also greet the members of
the armed forces and paramilitary forces who guard our frontiers on
the land, the sea and the air, and also internal security forces, I would
like to share some of my thoughts for evolution of a beautiful India,
combining economic prosperity and value system drawn from our
Indian economy shows a very robust and consistent
growth, indicated by the recent 8.4% GDP growth in the second
quarter of 2003-2004. Our foreign exchange reserves have crossed
the $100 billion mark and are continuously rising. The rupee is
steady and the middle class resurgence and the domestic buying
power are on the rise. This has made our economy one of the fastest
growing in the world. The time has come for these economic benefits
to reach speedily the rural population through development
programmes such as PURA - Providing Urban amenities in Rural
Areas and Interlinking of Rivers. Economists all around the world
predict that by the year 2020, the world economic scenario will be
completely different from what it is today, and that India will occupy
the pride of position.
Indian industries in certain sectors have matured to be very
responsive to the national and international needs and have shown
steady growth in spite of earlier adverse predictions. Interest rates
from the banks need to be more proactive to stimulate the growth
of the right type of small and medium scale industry and agro food
processing industries. The combination of entrepreneurship education
Address to the Nation on the eve of 55th Republic Day, New Delhi, 25 January 2004
4 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
in the schools and colleges, the hassle free flow of venture capital
and evolution of good market will give additional momentum for
For the next five years, with certain progress behind us, the
challenge we have is to launch a major thrust for attaining national
prosperity. We should convert the present opportunity and work towards
giving our future generations a competitive nation which has the
(a) A Nation that is prosperous, healthy, secure, peaceful and
(b) A Nation where the rural and urban divide has reduced to a
(c) A Nation where there is an equitable distribution of energy
(d) A Nation where agriculture, industry and service sector work
together in symphony, absorbing technology thereby resulting
in sustained wealth generation leading to higher employment
(e) A Nation where education is not denied to any meritorious
candidates because of societal or economic discrimination.
(f) A Nation which is the best destination for the most talented
scholars and scientists all over the world.
(g) A Nation where the best of health care is available to all the
billion population and the diseases like AIDS/TB, water
borne diseases, cardiac diseases and cancer are extinct.
(f) A Nation where the governance uses the best of the
technologies to be responsive, transparent, easily accessible
and simple in rules, thereby corruption free.
(i) A Nation where poverty has been totally alleviated, illiteracy
and crime against women are eradicated and the society is
(j) A Nation that is one of the best places to live in on the earth
and brings smiles on a billion faces.
These are the ten dimensional transformations needed for a
competitive India and we have to work for.
For continuing our mission of national development and economic
growth in our subcontinent, peace is a paramount ingredient. Most
nations have realized that low intensity proxy wars, deterrence-based
build-ups and real wars are too expensive detractors from the perceived
visions of development. The development of the society also weans
away its people from destructive activities of alienation, leading to
When guns are silent,
Flowers blossom on the earth;
Fragrance engulfs good souls,
Who created beautiful silence.
India will always be grateful to the successful peacemakers.
When I assumed office on 25th July 2002,1 addressed the need
for unity of minds becoming one of the focused missions for our nation.
Recently fifteen Gurus, Acharyas, Swamijis, Maulavis, Reverend
Fathers, spiritual leaders, devotees and the representatives of many
religions met at Surat in the presence of His Holiness Acharya
Mahaprajna and deliberated for two days and took vital decisions
leading to the religions graduating as a spiritual force. Also, they
have declared that the nation is bigger than any leader or individual
or an organization. They had collectively evolved five inter-religious
projects for implementation. Nation's best wishes to our spiritual leaders
and their mission of transforming religions into a spiritual force.
Also certain challenges before the nation are to be addressed
collectively in the immediate future to facilitate faster pace of national
Our scientists should become civic scientists and contribute towards
societal transformation. Civic means concerning or affecting the
community or the people. In the new capacity, scientists step beyond
their campuses, laboratories, ministries and institutes and move into
6 APJ ABDUL ICALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
the centre of their communities to engage in active dialogue and action
with their fellow citizens. They should ask themselves a question,
how their knowledge can make an impact on the common man's life?
Our civil servants and others in the service sector should become
fearlessly people-friendly, have a positive attitude, and provide
responsive, proactive, transparent and unbiased administration and
service to the billion people.
Assent has been accorded for the 86th Constitution Amendment
Act - Right to Education Bill for children between the age group of 5
and 14 years. Urgent action is needed for providing suitable school
in frastructure and appointment of good teachers for running the schools
for providing quality education to the children blended with the modem
technologies of e-leaming and tele-education. While doing so a review
of the syllabus is also required to prevent overloading of the children
for ensuring blossoming of their creativity.
The nation's vision of developed India requires greater thrust to
scientific and technological advancements. All our IITs, IIMs have
graduated as world class brand institutions in addition to the century-
old premier institution - Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. These
characteristics must be preserved and nurtured. We should also
encourage universities to become cradles of higher learning and research,
contributing generation of high skilled global human resource force.
Often, we have witnessed that many important national
examinations have been the target of attack by a select group of corrupt
individuals who undermine the very fabric of secrecy and transparency
in the conduct of these examinations. While we should deal with such
individuals with sternness to protect the image of our national selection
system and the quality, we should also find technological solution
that can ensure tamperproof examination system.
With farmers in focus, farming technology as their friend, and
food processing and marketing as partners is indeed the second green
revolution. From now on to 2020, India would have to gradually increase
the production to around 400 million tonnes per annum. The increase
in the production will have to be done under the reduced availability
of land from 170 million hectares to 100 million hectares with reduced
water availability using technological inputs.
Institutions of pharmaceutical sciences and pharma industries
need to evolve an integrated and comprehensive National pharma
Vision to meet the challenges of design to drug development, production
and marketing. The major challenge before the Pharma community
is to prevent the entry of spurious drugs and eradicate its presence in
With our self-reliance in our space programme it is time we
should enter into the global market aggressively. The exploration of
the moon through 'Chandrayaan' and keeping our sight on the Mars
will electrify the entire country, particularly young scientists and
Modernization of our armed forces with force multipliers is indeed
progressing to meet the national security needs. Defence technology
has led to the development of long range missile systems and supersonic
cruise missile, Light Combat Aircraft, electronic warfare systems,
radars, under-water sensors, combat vehicles and armaments. The Indo-
Russian joint venture programme - BRAHMOS - is one of the leading
examples of development, production and marketing of state-of-the-
Our power generation capacity of 100,000 megawatts has to be
tripled by the year 2020. In addition to the power generation from
the conventional sources we need to enhance the power generation
capacity through non-conventional energy sources to attain power
security. Also the present nuclear capacity of 2700 megawatts should
be enhanced to more than 20,000 megawatts by 2020. Desalination
plants can be co-located with the future nuclear power plants for
converting seawater into drinking water. We need to establish large
solar farms of 800 to 1000 megawatts capacity in many areas to augment
8 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Every academic institution and R&D organisation is a reservoir
of knowledge. Technology will also spin off to societal products which
are cost-effective, high-quality and available to the people in time.
Thrust is required in Nano science and biotechnology to achieve
leadership in these areas in the coming decade. The scientists and
technologists must undertake a health mission "Let my brain remove
the pain". The scientific community must realize that the competitiveness
can come only by integrated mission-driven programmes partnered
by academy, R&D organisation and industry.
The status of environmental cleanliness is one of the indicators
of development of a nation. As a nation, we have to keep our
environment clean and tidy. This is essential for better health
conditions of all the citizens and also for presenting a wholesome
and aesthetic atmosphere for us and also the tourists visiting our country.
It is essential that we keep all our places of worship and rivers clean
and tidy to preserve their innate divinity. Each one of the States may
promulgate appropriate local laws for promoting harmonious
environment in their regions.
The general elections for 14th Lok Sabha will take place in early
2004. I was thinking what could be the manifesto of the competing
political parties for the election. India has more than 540 million people
upto the age of 25 years. India is a nation of youth. During my
interactions with the youth of our country, two aspects have come
out very clearly. One is that the young have a passion, self-respect
and dream to live in developed India. Second, they want to live in a
corruption-free India. I can see these two are glowing in their eyes. I
am also convinced that we should build developed India in a time-
bound way to prevent instability in the society. Hence the manifesto
of the political parties has to take into account their aspirations and
design them to meet the dream of the young and be resonant with
their aspirations with identified missions and action plan. Every political
party must clearly state their vision, action plan, and approaches for
the developed India vision 2020 and how fast they can realize these
missions in quality and quantity.
Every citizen has got a role to choose the right representative to
the Parliament and Legislatures, whose vision is that of national
development and who has the concern for his/her constituency and
the people. The right to vote is the greatest power given by the democracy
to you, so that you can reinforce further democratic values. I would
like to appeal to all eligible voters to exercise their franchise without
fail, fear or favour. Large voter turnout will be the first step towards
realization of developed India 2020, and the second step would be to
become enlightened righteous citizens.
Which is the starting point, for the character evolution in the
nation? Let me share with you an incident, which took place somewhere
in Nagaland. I was talking to a group of 600 persons consisting of
young children, their parents and teachers. The topic I selected was
the knowledge society, foundation for a developed India. One boy
who was studying in 10th class, asked me, "Mr. President, tell me is
it possible for a nation to get transformed into a developed country,
when there is corruption everywhere?" This question greatly upset
the many faces of the experienced generation. I said that, "the question
was beautiful and I must answer", fortunately, the boy's parents and
teachers were sitting by his side. I asked both, "Do you have an answer?"
They said, "Mr. President, he shouldn't have asked such a question,
which is beyond his age. Please ignore it, sir". How can I ignore such
a valuable mind? I must answer. My answer was the following.
We can create any number of laws in the country. No law can
remove corruption fully. However there are only three members of
the society, who can remove corruption. I call it as a "Three dimensional
action" plan. Who are these three members? They are father, mother
and elementary school teacher. In this connection, I would like to
recall a famous statement from Vedic Guru, who said "You give me
a child for seven years - after that, no God or devil can change the
child". That is the power of the teacher.
My dear young friends, when you hear my national broadcast,
please ask yourself a question, what can be the greatest contribution
that the youth can give without disturbing their academic pursuit.
10 APi ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
You have to commence a silent revolution for removal of corruption
by rightly reforming those who go against righteousness in your families.
You all must endeavour to make the home you live, beautiful and
righteous. You definitely have the power on your parents to do so,
with love and affection.
Now I would like to administer an oath for the youth which I
would like the youths to repeat with me now, wherever you are. Are
1. I will pursue my education or the work with dedication and
I will excel in it.
2. From now onwards, I will teach at least 10 persons to read
and write, i.e. those who cannot read and write.
3. I will plant at least 10 saplings and shall ensure their growth
4. I will visit rural and urban areas and permanently wean away
at least 5 persons from addiction and gambling.
5. I will constantly endeavour to remove the pain of my suffering
6. I will not support any religious, caste or language
7. 1 will be honest and will endeavour to make a corruption-
8. I will work for becoming an enlightened citizen and make
9. I will always be a friend of the mentally and physically
challenged and will work hard to make them feel normal,
like the rest of us.
10. I will proudly celebrate the success of my country and my
India is very fortunate to have 540 million youth out of a billion
people. We are doing well in agriculture, our industry is on the upswing
and our performance in the services sector is also equally good. Time
has now come for us to make our country, righteous. Righteousness
comes out of good character. The evolution of good character leads
to harmony in home. Harmony in home brings the people of the state
to become enlightened citizens. Enlightened citizens lead the planet
earth to be a peaceful world.
Let us rededicate ourselves on this occasion of the 55th Republic
Day to work towards making India a prosperous, happy and secure
nation, with smile on billion faces.
Voting - A Sacred Mission
~\7r OU MIGHT RECALL during my address to the nation on the eve
of 55th Republic day 2004,1 had appealed to you that all eligible
voters must exercise their franchise without fear. As you are aware,
India, the largest democracy in the world is going to elect the members
of her 14th Lok Sabha and members of Legislative Assembly in four
states. It is a great opportunity provided to you to elect the members
who will be guiding the destiny of the nation for the next five years.
The right to vote is a sacred right and an onerous responsibility that
you owe to the motherland. Hence, exercising your franchise must
become a priority activity for you and you should go for casting your
By casting your vote to a candidate who in your opinion can
represent you in the Lok Sabha, you are sowing the seeds for creating
a prosperous India, a happy India, a safe India, a secure India and
above all an India with nobility. May I remind you that by casting
your vote you will be fulfilling the aspirations of the children and the
youth of our nation and create a powerful system that will make their
In a democracy one important principle is the equality of every
citizen. Time of election is an occasion when this can be demonstrated
visibly. This is an opportunity for all of you, who are eligible to vote,
to go to the booths and exercise your franchise. Therefore, I would
request all the eligible voters both in urban and rural areas to give a
pleasant surprise to the nation by going and voting in large numbers
with your eligible family members.
I have been assured by the Election Commission that all the polling
officers and professionals responsible for conduct of polls will provide
Address to the Nation on the occasion of the Elections to the 14th Lok Sabha,
easy-to-follow clarifications and guidance to the voters for their doubts,
help them with a smile in exercising their franchise and be people-
Dawn of beautiful India is in your mind and then in your deeds.
The deed for the day of the election for you is to cast your vote and
be a proud contributor to the success of the spirit of democracy of the
largest and dynamic democracy of all democracies.
I appeal to all of you to go ahead and exercise your fundamental
Education for Dignity of Human Life
N THE EVE OF the 58th Independence Day, I extend to you
my best wishes for your happiness and prosperity. My greetings
to all of you at home and abroad. Let us, on this occasion,
remember with gratitude the selfless and devoted services of
our Armed Forces and those of the Paramilitary Forces, who are
guarding our frontiers on the land, the sea, and in the air. I take this
opportunity on this Independence Day to convey the best wishes of
the people of India, to our men and women participating in the Olympic
I met 200 freedom fighters from different parts of the country
on 9th August 2004.1 saw in their ripe age, their enthusiasm to bring
back the nationalism as a living movement. I salute all our freedom
fighters on this occasion. Let me dedicate this Independence Day
broadcast to those great souls who pioneered our Independence
movement. We remember them with reverence and gratitude for
liberating us from centuries of foreign rule. Their saga of sacrifice
has realized the singular and the noble vision of heralding an independent
We must realize the significance and the value of our freedom
movement. Fortunately after our independence in 1947, we have come
a long way in the field of education and moved towards a knowledge
society, as a result of the vision of our educationalists and the policies
and actions of successive governments. Many of our educational
institutions have excelled in the world. In order to revitalize our self
esteem and culture, it is vital to emphasize the role of education system
for creating an enlightened, dynamic and prosperous society utilizing
the advancement of science and technology. I therefore propose to
Address to the Nation on the eve of 58th Independence Day, New Delhi, 14 August

discuss the education system in some detail in the later part of my
The nation is happy that the conduct of the recent general elections
and transition to a new government has taken place in a peaceful and
orderly manner. In an increasingly complex world environment, this
significant achievement emerging from India is yet another valuable
contribution to world peace and stability. Now that the government
is in place, we all have to get on with the work of building the nation.
We are steadily strengthening our presence in Regional and
International institutions including the United Nations. We also realize
it is essential to strengthen and restructure the United Nations to make
it more purposeful. We cherish and advocate multi-polarity in the
world order that respects the principles of sovereignty, non-intervention,
freedom and democracy. While not forgetting the painful lessons of
history, our foreign policy is aimed at a vision that seeks to establish
India, the largest democracy in the world, as a developed country
with its rightful place in the international fora.
With the rapidly changing global security environment, our nation's
domains of security concerns have greatly expanded from what it
was after Independence. Another measure of our nation's strength is
the effective, firm and fair handling of a series of internal low intensity
conflicts and the proxy war. I note with satisfaction our continuing
efforts towards good neighbourly relations, particularly the sustained
progress of the peace process between India and Pakistan.
Our economy has yielded a growth rate of Gross Domestic Product
by over 8%, driven by broad-based accelerated growth in agriculture,
infrastructure, manufacture and service. Sustaining our growth,
containing annual inflation rate, containing revenue deficit through
prudent revenue enhancement and expenditure management are the
other challenges for Centre and the States. The root cause of poverty
lies in illiteracy, unemployment and lack of basic health care and
there is a need to sharply increase public spending in these areas.
Certain regions in the country like Bihar and Assam are constantly
affected by floods every year, and we are witnessing that even now.
16 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
There is a need to find a long-term solution to control floods and
store and utilize the surplus water for usage during dry season and
also the linking of regional river basins. In the Gangetic plain and in
the north-eastern region, I would recommend construction of layered
wells in the entry points of Kosi river flowing from Nepal and
Brahmaputra flowing from Tibet. These layered wells will store the
floodwater at different levels and will control the intensity of damage
in low-lying areas by reducing velocity of flow. In addition we may
consider the possibility of underground water storage systems at river
basin sites and also other places. The water thus stored will be useful
at the time of need. Water mission has been rightly identified as a
priority area by my government.
Our employment generation system has not kept pace with the
inflow of educated youth. A three-pronged strategy is needed to make
education more attractive and simultaneously create employment
potential - how do we do that? Firstly, the educational system should
highlight the importance of entrepreneurship and prepare the students
right from the college education to get oriented towards setting up of
enterprises. Diversity of skills and perseverance in work makes an
entrepreneur. In addition, college syllabi even for arts, science, and
commerce courses should include topics and practicals where such
entrepreneurship is possible. Secondly, the banking system should
provide venture capital right from every village level to the prospective
entrepreneurs for undertaking new enterprises. Banks have to be
proactive to support the innovative products for enabling wealth
generation by young entrepreneurs by setting aside the "conventional
tangible asset syndrome". Thirdly, there has to be an economic pull
for generation of marketable products and enhancement of purchasing
power among the people. This can come through by implementation
of mega programmes such as rural connectivity, regional linking of
rivers, infrastructural missions, power missions and tourism.
We need the education system to focus on high value and
productive employment opportunities. The recent study indicates that
the unemployment level in the country is 9% of400 million employable
people. That is around 36 million. We can definitely find productive
employment for all the 36 million people by launching certain missions
like bio-diesel generation through plants such as Jatropha, dry land
and herbal farming in the available 33 million hectares of waste land
Education is the most important element for growth and prosperity
of a nation. India is in the process of transforming itself into a developed
nation by 2020. Yet we have 350 million people who need literacy
and many more who have to acquire employable skills to suit the
emerging modem India and the globe. Children who belong to weaker
sections of our society are undernourished, and only a small percentage
of them manage to complete 8 years of satisfactory education. We
need to think specifically for them. Education is indeed a fundamental
right of every Indian child. Can we allow the situation to continue in
which millions of these children are forced into lifelong poverty?
The requirement is that the parents should be able to go to any school
nearby and admit their children and happily come back home with
the confidence that their children will get a good and value-based
quality education in that school. The conditions of differently-abled
children require equally important attention. In view of such critical
issues and their importance, and also to break out of our historical
mindset, an effective and self-renewing education system is therefore
fundamental to the survival and growth of civilizations, therefore I
now propose to address the issues pertaining to education in some
detail and suggest some solutions, which can be considered for
Let me share with you one important concern: unequal access to
educational resources still exists due to a variety of reasons. For example,
I have seen in our villages three types of families. The fortunate ones
who realize the importance of educating the young ones at any cost,
guide them at all critical stages due to their economical well-being.
There are those families, who might realize the importance of education,
but are not aware of the opportunities in time, nor the procedures and
ways to realize these opportunities for their children. There is a third
category of families who are economically weak and do not realize
the value of education and hence for generations together their children
are neglected and continue to live in poverty.
18 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
It is essential that we enlighten and create widespread awareness
of education among all sections of society particularly in rural areas
and among urban poor. We should use technology for this important
social purpose. It is possible for NGOs, other social and philanthropic
institutions and media to focus on this area of creating awareness.
We should also mobilize necessary resources for providing education
to the underprivileged people. Let us elaborate the way ahead.
Over the last 50 years, successive Governments have been
committed to achieving the national goal of universal education and
has steadily increased the budgetary allocation for education. However,
35% of our adult populations are yet to achieve literacy. The expenditure
on education as a percentage of our gross domestic product has a
direct impact on our literacy. Today our expenditure on education in
India is little more than 4% of our GDP. If we have to achieve nearly
100% literacy, it is necessary to increase its expenditure on education
to about 6 to 7% of the GDP. This 2 to 3% increase has to be sustained
only for a few years. Thereafter, a lower percentage of GDP allocation
to education will be adequate to sustain the high degree of literacy in
this country for all time to come.
Clearly public expenditure alone from Governments in the Centre
and States might not be able to meet the challenge of mobilizing an
additional 2 to 3% of GDP for the mission of education. It is here that
we have to generate additional resources for this noble mission.
Expenditure on education, whether in the Centre or in the States t^n
no longer be provided only by the respective Ministries or Departments
for human resource development. Indeed, every department of
Government must play a significant role as a partner of the human
resource development organization, and contribute resources in terms
of budget and infrastructure for implementing the mission of providing
quality education to the whole nation.
To augment the Government resources, 1 appeal to the entire
corporate sector to emulate the example set by some corporate leaders
who have focused on education to make a national difference. Different
regions of the country may be adopted by the corporate sectors within
an overall national mission for education. The mechanism should enable
the persons to have freedom to innovate and deliver directly.
The preferred school concept is arising because of differential
quality and standards of teaching. There is a need to make the quality
of teaching high in all schools. Also there is a need for preparatory
education even in rural areas to make the child competitive when he
or she joins the regular school. For running such schools in rural
areas NGOs and corporate sectors can play a vital role. Also rich
parents who can afford can adopt certain number of rural children for
educating in preparatory schools.
I would like to recall a question asked by Master Kuldeep Yadav,
Class X, of Etawah during my visit to Saifai. He asked me:
"'Villages are also full of talents but facilities are available in the
towns/cities only. Have you planned something for these children so
that they can get good education in the villages?"
1 was glad to see a child's concern for his rural counterparts. We
need to address this problem, which has multiple dimensions. It tells
about the non-availability of infrastructural facilities in schools, the
problem of syllabi followed in the school and the non-availability of
Job opportunities being national, the syllabus should be structured
in such a manner that it should meet the changing societal needs,
fulfill the needs of the occupation and inculcate high moral values
among the students in addition to learning skills. The delivery of quality
education is possible only through quality teachers. The teacher has
to be a committed teacher who loves teaching and children. And also
the teacher has to be equipped with all the knowledge required for
effective teaching. The self-esteem of the teacher must be high and
the teacher must have the quality to become a role model for the
children. Some element of competitive rewarding is to be done based
on performance. This competency has to be built up throughout the
country through a massive teachers education programme delivered
through a tele-education system and continuously updated. This can
be funded and implemented by a consortium of Government, educational
institutions with the corporate sectors providing value added services.
20 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
There is an urgent need that every school should have basic amenities
such as good building equipped with ventilated, lighted, airy and spacious
class rooms besides library, laboratories including the latest IT tools
and infrastructure, safe drinking water, clean toilets, play ground, etc.
This is possible by earmarking the additional 2 to 3% of GDP.
Parents have an important role in the education of the children
and making them enlightened citizens. They must be aware of the
need for good education of the child, male or female. Like teachers,
parents also should set an example for the child in their overall behaviour
and conduct. This will enable the child to develop love and respect
for their parents and see them as role models.
It is reported that 39% of children drop out from school after
studying 5th class and 55% drop out after studying up to 8th class.
This situation needs remedial action, especially since asseftt has been
accorded for the 86th Constitution Amendment Act - Right to Education
Bill for children between the age group of 5 and 14 years. But an Act
alone cannot achieve the goal unless the education is delivered in a
manner, which will take into account the socio-economic reality, and
perception of people to whom it is addressed. Apart from attracting
children to schools, the education system should be able to provide
nourishment and inject creativity among the children. Also the aim
of the education system should be to build character, human values,
enhance the learning capacity through technology and build the
confidence among children to face the future.
I have seen an education model implemented in Karnataka, which
provides an accelerated learning using the computer aids so that children
can have a creative learning with the tools of creative animation through
computers. Dropouts are identified and brought to the school. This
holistic phenomenon of learning once ingrained in the primary stage
where there is a happy learning process and a non-threatening evaluation,
has led to voluntary learning by the participants.
Recently, I have received many e-mails from children and parents
regarding too many entrance examinations which the children have
to take from nursery up to plus-two level for entry into schools, colleges,
universities and professional courses. This I consider as a heavy burden
on the children. Also, it has led to proliferation of tuitions and coaching
institutes for preparing the students for entrance examinations. For
entry into universities and professional colleges, we have to devise a
common all India examination to be conducted by a nominated
institution of Government. Also, the examination must be so designed
that attending a coaching course does not provide undue advantage
to privileged students. Entrance test should be more in the nature of
aptitude assessment rather than creating a seniority list.
I find there is a demand for more transparent and reliable system
of examination, evaluation and reporting. It is also noticed that the
examination primarily tests the memory of the students. I remember
during my study in MIT, Chennai in mid 1950s, they used to conduct
open book examination. This used to be one of the tough examinations
for the students. I would recommend that the examining bodies may
consider introduction of open book system of examination. This will
promote creativity among the teachers in setting questions and the
evaluation of the creative ability of the students. A secure examination
system is the need of the hour.
The examining bodies should have a reliable evaluation system
and timely declaration of results. After the initial evaluation of the
answer paper a centralized core group can draw random samples from
each batch and carry out independent evaluation. If there is no
discrepancy between the initial evaluation and the core group evaluation,
and it is consistent with the performance of the students, it will be
presumed that the batch marking is satisfactory. In case of a discrepancy
further samples should be drawn for verification. Special training
must be carried out by examining bodies for certifying the
examiners in the evaluation process. In short the examining bodies
must evolve very good procedures and then get ISO Certification for
The recent tragedy involving school children at Kumbakonam
must have rung some bells in all the educational institutions in the
country. It is the responsibility of sponsoring organization to see that
22 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
their schools maintain basic minimum norms both in the academic
field as well as in the physical facilities which they provide on their
campuses. Certain safety features must be built in ounschool buildings
without which it should not be possible to get affiliation by these
schools. And there should not be any discretion available with anyone,
to waive off these conditions. Honesty in implementation is vital at
Constraints of time and space together with the rapid obsolescence
of knowledge in some areas of science and technology, have created
a huge demand for different courses from different institutions in the
distance mode. There is a need for a working digital library system
that alone can, in the long run, provide the kind of access required for
a Knowledge Society. Technology Enhanced Learning is a solution.
It attempts to exploit the rapid developments in Information and
Communication Technology. As the communications bandwidth
continues to increase and the cost of computer power continues to
drop, Technology Enhanced Learning will become an economically
viable solution. Virtual classrooms of the future will have students
from many locations taught by a team of geographically distributed
Instructors through tele-education delivery system.
Ultimately, education in its real sense is the pursuit of truth. It is
an endless journey through knowledge and enlightenment. Such a
journey opens up new vistas of development of humanism where there
is no scope nor room for pettiness, disharmony, jealousy, hatred or
enmity. It transforms a human being into a wholesome whole, a noble
soul and an asset to the universe. Universal brotherhood in its true
sense becomes the sheet anchor for such education. Real education
enhances the dignity of a human being and increases his or her self-
respect. If only the real sense of education could be realized by each
individual, and carried forward in every field of human activity the
world will be so much a better place to live in.
Mission of education by Government at Centre or States or the
combination is the foundation to ensure the creation of enlightened
citizens who will make a prosperous, happy and strong nation.
Strength of India-Post lies in its People
J AM INDEED delighted to inaugurate the Sesquicentennial
Celebrations of India-Post. My greetings to the organizers,
government functionaries, all members of the Department of Post
including all the Post Office Personnel and their families working in
far flung areas of the country during this historic occasion. Post Office
is the only institution in the country which touches every person's
life. This is demonstrated by the fact that whenever government or
non-government agencies attempt to reach the largest number of people
they think of the Post Office. I would like to congratulate the pioneering
spirit, resilience and the glorious traditions of providing quality service
of this Department, which is now 150 years old, to the common man
in all parts of the country, if we have to recreate this organization
today, it will cost over Rs.50,000 crores. I note the accumulated savings
deposits today amount to over Rs. 3,25,000, which is almost equivalent
to the deposit of a leading nationalized bank in India.
There has been considerable technological change in the
communication system in the 20th century. With the introduction of
fax, e-mail, Internet, video conferencing, tele-education, tele-medicine,
the concept of communication has considerably changed. Now the
information-communication is moving electronically from one end
to the other, and the need for physical movement of information is
gradually coming down and is being restricted to physical commodities
like parcels, gifts, etc. With these changes, there is a need for creating
a new vision for the vibrant post office system.
The strength of India-Post lies in its people. Post Office is an
institution. Postmen have knowledge of the village and they have a
lasting relationship with the people. The core strength of the Post
Address at the inauguration of the Sesquicentennial Celebrations of India-Post, New
Delhi, 4 October 2004
24 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Office lies in its connectivity to each and every village and the personal
knowledge of the postman of every house in the village. I still distinctly
remember the "runner" who were the pioneers in giving this connectivity
to the rural and remote areas. In the new environment where there is
an urgent need to develop our rural sector the Post Office system can
become a partner in rural development since there are possibilities of
new connectivities. Towards this end, I would like to make the following
We have developed a rural development model, which is based
on providing connectivities such as physical, electronic and knowledge
connectivity. Electronic connectivity to the groups of villages through
broadband, satellite and wireless for last mile connectivity would lead
to knowledge connectivity through tele-education and tele-medicine.
Also, as you are aware EDUSAT has been launched on 20th September
2004 which will enhance the education network for schools via tele
education network connected to educational institutions and universities.
In addition, the land and wireless connections now available all over
India can be integrated to provide various forms of connectivities as
required for the rural area. The major focus of PURA - Providing
Urban amenities in Rural Areas - would be on entrepreneurship,
sustainable employment, economic growth and marketing (local vs.
global). To begin with, in the entire country we propose to have nearly
7000 PURAs. At present there are 1,30,000 post offices in the rural
areas out of a total of 1,56,000 post offices in the country. This means
we can have nearly 19 post offices per PURA. These Post Offices
located in the PURA complex can be identified as a hub for the provision
of electronic connectivity and knowledge connectivity to the village
community leading to economic connectivity of the village clusters.
Post offices at various levels of operations can be the partner in rural
development, since the post offices are already linked to the people.
The rural economy can be enhanced if we can provide
knowledge inputs at the right time to the farmers, artisans, craftsmen,
small-scale industries, self-help groups and entrepreneurs through these
connected post offices. The rural people will need information on the
state-of-the-art technology relevant to their area/region for getting
better yield from their land at reduced cost of farming. They will also
like to know about the arrival of the monsoon and the action to be
taken in case of monsoon delays. Through mobile tele-education
networks, the equipped post offices can reach the rural people and
provide them information on the farm mix suitable for their land and
also methods of multi-cropping and use of organic manure and
pesticides. This will enable the farmers to understand the problem
better and implement the solution in their fields. The students in the
villages would like to have information on various courses of study
in ITI, diploma education centres, vocational training centres, colleges
and also about the types of skills which have greater employment
potentials so that they can acquire right types of skills. They also
would like to know about the employment opportunities and
entrepreneurial opportunities within the PURA complex and other
PURA complexes located in the Districts or States. The village
community would like to know about the availability of clinics and
tele-medicine links to District and Corporate Hospitals so that they
can get the right type of health care support in times of emergencies.
They also need information on the doctors and clinics where vaccination
and immunization support is available for the children. Information
regarding the availability of the skill set in the village and products
and services available from the small scale industries in the village
complex would be useful for neighbouring PURAs and also distant
PURAs where there is shortage of such skills.
I understand that the Post Office has diversified the postal
operations into different areas through their business development
programmes. They have created new products and services such as
speed post, speed post passport service, media post, data post, e-bill
post, e-post etc.' which are definitely useful services to the common
man and the business community. In addition, the post office is
diversifying into financial services such as international money transfer
service, distribution of mutual funds and bonds, electronic funds transfer,
warrant payment, collection of telephone bills, etc.
There are a number of departments which are collecting
Contributory Provident Fund from their employees. The growth of
this task has been phenomenal and many departments are finding it
26 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
difficult to keep track of the contributions made by the employees,
adjustment of interest and provision of financial status to the employees.
This task can be very easily outsourced to the Department of Post
since they have gained adequate competence by maintaining the Post
Office Saving Account for lakhs of individuals.
I am happy to note that the Department is constantly building
the capacity of the Post Office to enable it to diversify the range and
quality of the marketing and financial services. On the insurance front,
the Postal Department is planning to offer new products such as Group
Premium Policy, Pension Schemes and Term Policy. In addition, for
persons in rural areas who have only studied upto 8th standard or
10th standard but have right marketable skills, the post offices can
also be used for micro-credit facilities so that they can become
Another major role for post offices is to prepare our citizens
for meeting the global challenges, coming out of globalization of
economies, and help in the process of knowledge servicing. Post Offices
can also contribute effectively in the operation of Village Knowledge
Centres which are proposed to be created in each of the Panchayats
India has approximately 2.3 lakhs Village Panchayats. I visualize
establishment of village knowledge centres in these Panchayats to
empower the villagers with the knowledge and to act as a nodal centre
for knowledge connectivity for the villagers. Initially 100 remote
Panchayats may be chosen for the Model Pilot project. Based on this
experience, it will be possible to replicate Village Knowledge Centres
This Centre will be equipped with 1000 books on different subjects.
In addition, it will have a computer terminal, telephone connections,
modem, printer, photocopier, camera, scanner, internet connection
and other support facilities for functioning as a digital library. The
knowledge centre will provide hard copies of relevant pages to the
members of the village, if required. Also the centre can have facility
for reading the text with an audio output so that people who are unable
to read, can benefit from the library. The knowledge centre can also
be used for collection, digital storage and dissemination of village-
specific information pertaining to agriculture, craftsmanship, arts,
artisanal techniques, informal judicial system practised in village based
on values, local remedies for simple ailments, village stories with
moral values, village history, village folk songs, village cultural
traditions, traditional medicinal practices followed in villages and
village marketing information and methods. Such information presently
is being transmitted through word of mouth and with changing
generation, it is being lost. The postal personnel and the teams which
will closely work with them can be deployed in the knowledge
management centre on part-time basis, which will not only enrich
their contribution to the society but also provide cost-effective digital
library and information services to the village community.
The village revenue authorities are presently maintaining the land
records manually and they collect the land tax from the landlords on
half yearly and yearly basis. Generally there is a delay in the change
of ownership in the land records leading to many disputes. The Post
Office can help the revenue authorities in computerizing all the land
records in the villages and also they can arrange billing to the landlords
on yearly or half yearly basis. Such computerized billing will enable
the landowners to pay the dues in time and also raise objections if
there are any discrepancies in the ownership data recorded in the land
records. This procedure, in addition to making the system of collection
fool proof, will reduce the possibility of disputes in land ownership,
which is a source of perennial problem in our villages. Post Office
can be paid an appropriate fee by the land record authorities for providing
In addition, the Mapping of Neighbourhood project successfully
executed by the Department of Science and Technology at Almora
District with the voluntary participation of school children can be
expanded in a major way by using post offices as focal points. However,
it should be executed imaginatively with flexibility because any
bureaucratic or hierarchical interference is not conducive to unleashing
the creativity of children.
28 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
What is today in place is a physical network of Post Offices. To
match the vision stated above, we have to put together an electronic
network which will interconnect the entire postal network. It is today
possible with the emergence of new communication technologies like
broadband, CDMA, WLL, and FDMA etc. along with enormous
governments/private initiatives in the form of making the bandwidth
available throughout the country. To start with, right up to the village
sub-post office level, a computerized network can be put together
with a central server technology of appropriate nature. The village/
branch post offices can also be linked to them either through the
computer network or to start with through a communication link by
way of landline or mobile telephone which can be even web-enabled.
This will straight away give the rural post offices ability to communicate
with the urban centres, both ways, and provide a network which can
facilitate the knowledge connectivity. Over a period, through the
concerted efforts of all the stakeholders it is possible to create contents
of appropriate nature right from agricultural practices to monsoon
prediction, local medical knowledge to the advanced medical counselling
centres etc. That all these things can be done for a fee can make the
postal network also viable. Mere technological additions may not make
the envisaged system effective; what is called for is large-scale training
and motivation of the Post Office personnel at all levels and particularly
at the cutting edge in the village level, to be an empowered entrepreneur
rather than a mere paid employee. Suitable linkages with the banking
sector can ensure the rural youth and the unemployed to get financial
support in the form of credit, which will enable them to expand their
business horizon, provide in-depth connectivity and thereby become
owners of viable postal entities. Thus, it is a win-win proposition for
the India-Post and its employees as well as to the millions of villagers
and particularly the youth. A sense of urgency is required in
implementing the programme of this nature which is in perfect
consonance with the national development goal and harmony with
The strength of India-Post is threesome, viz. the trust of the people
in the institution, its network and the human resources. This is a user-
friendly organization in the country and they have earned this friendliness
through delivery of information and money order to the clients. They
help in providing connectivity of hearts. By nature, it is an expanding
and outgoing organization. These strengths should be leveraged and
a growing system should be developed which will serve the national
development cause while optimizing technologically the power of
the post offices by becoming a partner in rural development. The
completion of 150 years by India-Post brings it face to face with
opportunities as well as threats - the opportunities due to the newly
emerging technologies and the threats due to the competitive forces.
The post office in collaboration with institutions like NABARD can
become a main source for disbursing rural credit at economical interest
rates which appears to be the crying need of the hour for our rural
population. A living organization thrives by converting every threat
into an opportunity and I am sure that the India-Post can rise up to
the occasion and make substantial contribution towards transforming
India into a developed nation.
I would like to share with you my visualization of the postal
systems of the new millennium. The post office personnel can be
empowered with a mobile telephone, a personal digital assistant (PDA)
and the capacity to mobilize rural postal life insurance. This will enable
him to provide service to the remote rural dweller who needs to
communicate for multiple purposes. The information stored in the
PDA will enable him to give to the villagers the information needed
for agriculture, craftsmanship, marketing, education, health care etc.
to make meaningful use of inputs and outputs for promoting vibrancy
in the rural economic system. The promotion of postal life insurance
will bring social security at the doorstep of the villagers. All these
things put together even call for a renaming of the trained post office
personnel in a village as a "Rural Facilitator" or "Rural Knowledge
Officer" and those in cities as "Knowledge Service Providers".
The newly value-added services like savings banks, social security
measures like rural life insurance should be dovetailed into this electronic
and knowledge network so that resource mobilization, credit availability
and investment assurance will become available to the rural and the
middle class families who at present very often go through many
agencies. The stepping-in of India-Post into the infrastructural and
30 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
developmental process should become the theme for the resurgent
India-Post of the 21st century.
I would recommend the following six missions for India-Post
for the new millennium:
(a) Transforming the post-man or post-woman to play a dual
role of being the friend of the family and also information
officer for empowering the villages. He or she will act as
an interface between technology centre, knowledge and
information base and the villagers.
(b) Preparing the system of India-Post to provide an empowered
network for promoting rural development.
(c) Creating a networked infrastructure of all the post offices
in the country through computers and tele-communications.
(d) Establishing village knowledge centres with data base required
for the rural development (agriculture, infrastructure,
education, employment, health care, land records etc.) in
collaboration with the relevant agencies.
(e) Training the human resources to undertake envisaged
(f) Empowering the post office personnel in a village to be re
designated as "rural knowledge officer" with mobile
telephone, PDA and other requisite facilities.
My best wishes to all members of India-Post for success in their
Innovation and its Dimensions
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in the 3rd National Award
Function of the National Innovation Foundation. I greet the award
winners, innovators, collaborators and the organizers and the National
Innovation Foundation (NIF). The objective of NIF to help India become
an innovative and creative society and a global leader in sustainable
technologies by scouting, spawning and sustaining grassroots
innovations, is indeed a laudable effort. Grassroots does not mean
living with old unproductive small time mindsets - cobbler as a cobbler,
fishermen in the same old boat with a few nuts changed - but to move
fast towards knowledge society. .
I was studying the Global Competitiveness Report for the year
2003-04. There I find in terms of Innovative Capacity Index, US is
ranked one, Singapore 6, South Africa 27, China 40, Brazil 42 and
India 44. In the same report I noticed that the proportion of Scientists
and Engineers Index is stated as US 4, Singapore 6, South Africa 38,
China 43, Brazil 51 and India 60. Thus, we can see the large proportion
of new ideas and innovations generated in the universities in USA.
This innovation arises from private sector initiative and the R & D
productivity of the firm, shaped by local policies and nature of local
institutions. National innovative capacity has to be the country's
important potential to reinforce both political and economic entity
with commercially relevant competitive products. This capacity is
distinct from purely scientific or technical achievements and focuses
on the economic application of new technology. Thus, for building
innovative capacity, we require the partnership of private sector, public
sector, R & D and academia as a group. I would recommend the
Hyderabad University to work towards building the innovative capacity
amongst its faculty and impart knowledge to students.
Address at the 3rd Annual Award Distribution Function of National Innovation
Foundation, Ahmedabad, 5 January 2005
32 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
To achieve a goal what is needed is not only knowledge, but
also a passion. The passion should not be limited to the technical
aspects but it should also aim towards creating a concern for the society
with a view to finding positive solutions to the problems.
In the present-day world when the corpus of known knowledge
is multi-disciplinary and products and services are complex it is often
not possible to have a loner as an innovator. Most of the discoveries
and innovations are team efforts. Education system should work towards
team building among the students. Every student must have an
opportunity to play the role of a team member and a team leader so
that he can see both sides of the fence. The amount of information
that we have around us is overwhelming. The management of knowledge
therefore must move out of the realm of the individual and shift into
the realm of the networked groups. The students must learn how to
manage knowledge collectively. When the information is networked
the power and utility of the information grows as squared as predicted
by Metcalfe's law. Information that is static does not grow. In the
new digital economy, information that is circulated creates innovation
and contributes to national wealth. In this context, let us discuss the
national scenario and its priorities.
The creativity is indeed the result of the education process and
the environment of the school and above all the teachers' capability
in igniting the minds of the students. The essence of it can be seen in
Creativity leads to thinking,
Knowledge makes you great.
I would like to share with this audience, information about the
six young innovators from various schools of our country whom I
met at Rashtrapati Bhavan on 2nd September 2004.
Their innovations were:- a system to prevent the soiling of railway
tracks by Madhav Pathak of Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh; herbal pesticide
tablets for storage of food grains by Priyanka Guleria of Sionty Village
in Punjab; low calorie biscuits made from banana peels by Rucha
Joshi of Nanded, Maharashtra; a toy laser for educational applications
by Sudhanwa Hukkeri of Belgaum, Karnataka; a software programme
for embedding of text through audio signals by Kyan Pardiwalla of
Mumbai, Maharashtra; and an optically-controlled wheelchair by S.
Harish Chandra of Chennai, Tamil Nadu.
The group was chosen following a rigorous selection process
and the innovations had the largest number of footfalls at the Tokyo
Exhibition. The process of selection and sending the group abroad
was co-ordinated by Confederation of Indian Industries (CII) and the
Department of Science and Technology (DST).
Since our population is of a billion people, the society in its own
way has to make innovations continuously, not only in urban areas
but also in rural areas. For example, the honey bee network movement
is an excellent attempt. Creativity comes from beautiful minds. It can
be anywhere and in any part of the country. It may start from a fisherman
hamlet or a farmer's household or a dairy farm or cattle breeding
centre or it emanates from class rooms or labs or industries or R&D
centres. Creativity has got multi-dimensions like inventions, discoveries
and innovations. Creativity has got an ability to imagine or invent
something new by combining, changing or re-applying existing ideas.
Creativity has an attitude to accept change and newness, a willingness
to play with ideas and possibilities, a flexibility of outlook, the habit
of enjoying the good, while looking for ways to improve it. Creativity
has a process to work hard and continually to improve ideas and solutions
by making gradual alterations and refinements to their works. The
important aspect of creativity is: seeing the same thing as everybody
else, but thinking of something different.
Innovation is market-driven. Innovation can also be making
improved performance of the product/system technique by adopting
a change using most alternative technologies. An innovative product
makes a leap in the benefits-to-costs ratio in some area of endeavour.
Innovation is a systematic, organized, rational work - usually done
in many stages like analysis, tests, experiment etc. I would like to
34 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
give a few examples of innovative technologies/applications. What
we see in optical communications is speed vs cost. In flexible
manufacturing systems it is choice vs cost. In the web-enabled processes,
it is customer satisfaction vs cost. Again in e-Mail, a message is instantly
delivered in any part of the world through internet.
It is through the process of innovation that knowledge is converted
into wealth and social good. Further, innovation is an important factor
for the competitiveness of both service and manufacturing sectors.
Innovation tends to emanate less from R&D and more from other
sources, including organizational change. Hence there is an urgent
need to establish an efficient innovation system in the country. Such
a system would involve creation of clusters, which are networks of
inter-dependent firms, knowledge-producing institutions (universities,
colleges/institutes, research institutes, technology-providing firms),
bridging institutions (e.g. think tanks, providers of technical or
consultancy services) and customers linked in a value-addition-creating
production chain. The concept of clusters goes beyond that of a firm
network, as it captures all forms of knowledge sharing and exchange.
Thus an innovative system with its clusters would tap into the growing
stock of global knowledge, assimilate and adapt it to local needs and
finally create new knowledge and technology.
The National Innovation Foundation is able to attract a number
of innovations coming from the rural sector. However, what they need
is design input to make it into a competitive marketable product. I
would recommend a collaborative venture between the National Institute
of Design and National Innovation Foundation to work on converting
the promising innovations into a commercially viable venture. This
can lead to creation of a number of enterprises in the rural sector
leading to large scale employment opportunity and wealth generation
in the rural areas. The establishment of enterprises for such ventures
can be financially supported by the Technology Development Board
which is part of the Department of Science and Technology.
Innovation at the rural area: Search and locate any ambient
innovation competencies, recognize promising innovations and assist
through Sell Help Groups. As a next stage, systematic design of the
innovation can be supported by institutions like NID transforming it
into a business proposition. At this stage banks should provide venture
capital. Once the production stabilizes in small scale it can be extended
to large commercial production through the assistance of Technology
Development Board. These enterprises should preferably be located
in the rural sector where the raw material and the inputs will be available.
Also there is a need to train the local youth for undertaking the production
and marketing operation. My best wishes to all members of the National
Innovation Foundation and rural innovators for their productive
contribution in the mission of rural development.
Action Plan for Employment Generation
frff % sptot w, sm TiFFtt M fft^
3^ ^eHHHUi I 3TF5I, 3 3TC^ ^1 3 3Ff?TF7 felfl %
fcpT Alidad) fN'IK ddh<H FT fF*FR 3 "FFf F^ftti
F^f FRF Fit -Q^ *JTFFR TRM FFTFT f I FRF 3 54
FRtf -jan ^FRT^I 11FST^ % FTF-RTF F^i SlrfSlFi
^pjl Ft ^ft #Tt I *!HdH altT 3Tlf^ ^ ^ TPOTR ^ Ft
FRF Fit t^ISM, ^f$IF F TT fFFrfflF "RFR ^ FFiFT

f3 spRt iFwt ftff FFRiFt- FF grr wttF fr
fcichRHd FRF % FT$F Fit FTFT FtFT I foR F3 F<F
FFRJF Frt*f %FFT ?W FF FT grt |HH<lO 3fa fFST 3
3TFFT FRFT FtFT, FFt F*t 2020 FFi fdd>ftHd ^T FF F%FT I
gt ITT fWIR t % ^Nt TJFTFt 3TRFIFF FT* ^! %
iFFT FR gFFFFTT fFEF, Ft TJ F fFFrfFF FRF % fFFT
3FF FF fFcTFR FFR7 FitRt I 3TR FF FRF 1> '%FF 3ftT
fRRFK <bYwi F^FT FFddl f^FTcft 11
3TF 3 3RRt FTF 3TM 3 F^FT I
"Everyone has inside of him or her, a piece of good news.
The good news is that you don't know how great you can be!"
Address to the Nation on the eve of 56th Republic Day, New Delhi, 25 January 2005
N THE EVE OF the 56th Republic Day of India, my greetings to
all of you, including those living abroad. I convey my special
greetings to the members of our armed forces and the paramilitary
forces, who guard our frontiers on the land, the sea and the air, and
also the internal security forces. While we are saddened by the wrath
of the Tsunami waves, we are not disheartened. The Central and State
Governments, with utmost seriousness and sincerity have reached
out to those who needed help and are in the process of providing
relief that will at least partially wipe out the pains caused by the Tsunami.
During this period of active relief operations, my heart was with you,
but I did not make a visit because the members of the Govt, and Non-
Government organisations were deployed in large numbers in the relief
operations, which were in full swing. Reviews were taken by our
Prime Minister, Governors, the Chief Ministers of the respective states
and Lt. Governor of Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Now, I feel that
the time has come for me to join you, my fellow citizens, to study the
process of the reconstruction of homes, and bringing back normalcy.
I met more than 6,00,000 children from all parts of our country,
after becoming the President. During my interaction with them, they
posed a series of questions, with affection. They asked:
"Mr. President, you saw us smile, when we were five years old.
We smiled because we were blossoming innocently. When we came
to our teens, smiles slowly faded away and the signs of concern appeared.
You said that it is because of our anxiety about our future. This anxiety
almost took away our smiles. When we complete our education, the
topmost questions in our mind were, what would I do after my
education? Will I get an employment? Our parents, who have spent
all their savings on our education, also share the same concern. Mr.
President, will I get a proper employment and be able to contribute to
India, to make it a Developed Nation?" Their questions really made
me to think and think.
The concerns about employment are not only for those who are
fortunate enough to have school and college education. It is the same
fading away of the smiles, the shattering of the dreams and the weaning
away of the gleam in the eyes that we see in every cross-section of
38 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
the youth in the country. The only answer to retain the smile from the
child to the youth is to generate employment. It represents the aspirations
and anxiety of nearly 540 million youth of our nation. Hence I have
selected the topic for the Republic Day address as "Action plan for
In my earlier address to the Nation on the eve of the 58th
Independence Day, I talked to you on "Education for Dignity of Human
life". The whole purpose of education in a country like India is to
develop and enhance the potential of our human resource and
progressively transform it into a knowledge society. The knowledge
society will be a society producing products and services that are
rich in both explicit and tacit knowledge, thus creating value-added
products. The real capital of this knowledge society will be its knowledge
workers. The society will be highly networked to create knowledge-
intensive environment along with enabling process to efficiently create,
share, use and protect knowledge. Our education system should re
align itself at the earliest to meet the needs of the present-day challenges
and be fully geared to participate in the societal transformation.
When the world was moving from the industrial to information
and knowledge era, we witnessed a changing pattern in the sectoral
share of GDP and the number of people employed in each sector. The
share of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) percentage has undergone a
considerable change. Contribution of agriculture to India's GDP has
reduced from 39% to 22% during the period 1979 to 2004. During
the same period contribution of manufacturing sector has moved from
24% to 27% and the contribution from the services sector has increased
from 37% to 51%. There has been considerable change in the
employment pattern also. The percentage of people employed in
agriculture has come down from 64% to 54%. Simultaneously, the
percentage of people employed in manufacturing has gone up from
15% to 19% and in the service sector from 20% to 27%. This trend
has to continue and by 2020 our employment pattern should aim at
44% in agriculture, 21% in manufacturing and 35% in service sectors.
The displacement of 10% people from agriculture sector has to be
facilitated through skills enabling undertaking value-added tasks in
the rural enterprises so that migration to urban area is reduced. Instead
of the person from the rural areas going to urban towns in search of
jobs in manufacturing and services sectors, PURA (Providing Urban
Amenities in Rural Areas) facilitates creation of employment in the
rural area itself PURA achieves this by providing physical, electronic
and knowledge connectivities to a cluster of villages thereby leading
to their economic connectivity and prosperity.
National Rural Employment Guarantee Bill 2004 was tabled in
the Parliament in its last session to create employment opportunities
in the rural sector. What is needed is a co-ordinated planning and
linking the spirit of this Bill to productive and sustainable employment
generation scheme to the unemployed youth. Now I would like to
discuss the national employment scenario. As per the estimate of the
Planning Commission, the total number of people eligible for
employment at present is approximately 400 million. Out of this, nine
percent are unemployed which works out to around 36 million. In
addition, there is a need to find value-added employment for 10% of
those employed in the agriculture sector in the rural areas. Our attempt
hence should be to find gainful employment for around 76 million
people. This will add to our productivity and will ensure a sustained
10% GDP growth for the decade, which is an essential need for India
to become a developed country before 2020. A nation of billion people
that is capable of exporting food grams, a nation that is recognized
for its software products and services, a nation that can build its own
aerospace systems and nuclear power plants, a nation that is leading
in pharma and automobile industry, I am sure, will be able to put all
its think tanks together and come up with many innovative wealth
generating schemes for the productive employment of 76 million people.
Let me share with you how to generate employment. The most
important sectors for sustainable national development are agriculture,
education, health care, water and energy. The common thread that
will run across these would be the three connectivities of PURA. One
of the ways by which the rural agriculturists could increase their earnings
is by value-adding to the agricultural produce by processing and
40 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
manufacturing. The farmers, either individually or through their
co-operatives would market processed and value-added items instead
of marketing the raw materials. This increase in the value-addition
taking place in the rural area itself is an indicator of the society
moving towards prosperity and knowledge era. I would like to suggest
a few schemes that can bring large-scale employment and prosperity
We have nearly 63 million hectares of wasteland available in
the country, out of which 33 million hectares have been allotted for
tree plantation. Certain multi-purpose bio-fuel plants can grow well
in wasteland with very minimum input. Once cultivated, the crop has
fifty years of life. Fruiting can take place in these plants in two years.
Bio-fuel plants grown in parts of the waste land, for example, 11
million hectares, can yield a revenue of approximately Rs.20,000 crore
a year and provide employment to over 12 million people both for
plantation and running of the extraction plants. It will reduce the foreign
exchange outflow paid for importing crude oil, the cost of which is
continuously rising in the international market. The bio-fuel is carbon
mono-oxide emission free. The oil can also be used for soap and in
candle industries. De-oiled cake is a raw material for composting,
and the plantation is also good for honey production. We should absorb
the best of the technologies available worldwide and start commercial
operation immediately. One-time investment needed for bio-fuel
plantation to production in 11 million hectares will be approximately
Rs.27,000 crore. The capital equipment and investment in plant and
machinery can come from bank loans and private sector entrepreneurs.
I have seen the progress in bio-fuel plant cultivation, preparation of
seedlings, tissue culture and development of non-toxic hybrid varieties
in Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore. They have also
worked from processing of seeds to bio-fuel production by the
indigenous design and development of bio-fuel plants. Anand
Agriculture University at Anand (Gujarat) has also made progress in
the bio-fuel cultivation and processing in Gujarat. Bio-fuel plants
can be grown in a number of states in the southern, western and central
parts of the country.
ICRISAT with its international experience of working in arid
regions have developed short duration, disease and drought resistant
varieties of important crops beneficial to our farmers. They have
introduced various tillage practices and nutrition management
techniques, to boost crop yields even under drought stress. This
technology will enable us to reclaim 5 more million hectares of the
33 million hectare of wasteland allotted for productive farming. As
per the experts, this will result in the deployment of 15 million people
for the dry land cultivation.
Water harvesting should become mandatory for all. To improve
water table, we need to build check dams, develop water sheds, desilt
ponds and rivers, clear the inlets and outlets to the ponds and water
bodies and recharge the wells. If our rural areas are made to have the
operational water bodies, recharging of the wells will take place. The
task is totally labour intensive and nationwide implementation of this
scheme will provide employment for six million persons for more
than three or four years. The scheme will result in increase in storage
capacity of water bodies and create additional irrigation potential of
the land in the region and enhance agricultural productivity.
This mission envisages an integrated programme of expansion
of plantations of bamboo species, the scientific management, and
promotion of community level value addition and entrepreneurship.
This will enable presenting the raw material for the industries and
the industry to access and apply modern technology for producing
globally competitive new generation bamboo products. This includes
setting up of clusters of small value addition processing units, near
the resource for employment generation and benefit to the local small
entrepreneur. Processed raw material suitable for ultimate use in
industry/handicraft sector will be required, for economizing handling
cost of raw material to the location of industry proposed to be set up
in different parts of the country. The programme envisages the
cultivation of bamboo over two million hectares and promotion of
technology and networking for enhancing the trade. The economic
and social benefit from these activities will lead to the creation of 8.6
million jobs and the market opportunities worth over Rs.6,500 crore
with an investment of Rs.2,600 crore. This will be useful for the
42 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
additional development of the north-eastern region. We should use
the management personnel, industrial experts and business houses to
provide international market connectivity for our bamboo products
leading to sustainable growth, wealth generation and positive
contribution to the growth of GDP. The institutions like National
Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, Indian Institutes of Management,
industrial houses, State government and Ministry of Agriculture can
work together to generate a number of bamboo enterprises in different
As you are aware, the use of coal for power generation results in
increased quantum of fly ash production, which has reached about
100 million tonnes per year. All out efforts are needed to utilize this
fly ash not only from environmental considerations, but also to avoid
land usage for fly ash dumping. Though there has been a steady progress
in fly ash utilization from 1990, we have a long way to go to reach
the target of 100% fly ash utilization. It is reported that the agricultural
increase of grains is around 15%, green vegetables 35% and root
vegetables 50%, when fly ash is mixed with the soil. Toxicity tests
have proved that there is no toxic element due to fly ash. But it
has higher nutrients due to increased availability of iron and
calcium. The fly ash can become a wealth generator by making
use of it for producing "green building" materials, road, agriculture
etc. Full utilization of the generating stock will provide employment
potential for 3,00,000 people and result in a business volume of over
Textile industry is very important for the Indian economy. The
basic raw material is cotton. India is the third largest producer of
cotton in the world. However, compared to the world average of 700
kgs of seed cotton per acre we produce only 350 kg of seed cotton per
acre. It is indeed a technological concern for the nation. Some of the
industries have adopted a village in Punjab, which has brought out a
co-operative movement of the farmers, scientists, trainers and the
industry and launched for cultivating cotton in over 1200 acres. A
training programme was launched for farmers starting with soil
characterization, matching the cottonseed to soil, water and fertilizer
management. The project resulted in increasing the average seed cotton
yield of the village from 450 kg per acre to 950 kg per acre. This led
to the sevenfold increase in net return per acre, due to considerable
reduction in input costs. It is worth noting that in this case the yield is
above the world average. This model has already been replicated in
ten villages and can be emulated by many cotton-growing regions of
the country. India can definitely produce 25% of the total world
production of quality cotton compared to the existing 12% leading to
revenue of over Rs.25,000 crore a year for the nation. I would like to
link cotton production to garment export business, which is a low
investment and large volume employment generator. India is presently
exporting six billion dollars worth of garments, whereas with the WTO
regime in place, we can increase the production and export of garments
to 18 to 20 billion dollars within the next five years. This will enable
generation of employment in general and in rural areas in particular.
By tripling the export of apparels, we can add more than 5 million
direct jobs and 7 million indirect jobs in allied sector, primarily in
the cultivation of cotton. Concerted effort is needed in cotton research,
technology generation, transfer of technology, modernization and upgrading
of ginning and pressing factories and aggressive marketing strategy.
Another area, which is an employment generator, is the health
care industry. We have only one doctor for 1,800 people, whereas
in some of the developed countries the doctor to population ratio is
1 : 600. For providing quality health care to all of our citizens, we
would need at least doubling the strength of doctors and paramedical
staff in the whole country. The investment for this need not necessarily
come from government alone. Hospitals can be set up by the private
sector with certain tax concessions and subsidized infrastructural
support. Setting up of 30,000 static tele-medicine stations distributed
in 30,000 key locations, within the zone of 3 lakh villages and providing
20,000 mobile tele-medicine units will enable reaching of quality health
care closer to every home, which are connected to the district, state
government hospitals, corporate hospitals, and super specialty hospitals
in the country. This is possible as India has a network of satellite
communication. How to reach health care for the large number of our
population? An innovative method has come into action in certain
states. This system provides free health cover to the citizens who are
members and pay Rs.10 per individual per month as an insurance
44 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
premium. State and Central Governments can sponsor this insurance
scheme involving payment of a small premium of Rs. 10 per individual
per month by the citizens in different states of the country. Such an
insurance cover should be able to provide for all types of diseases
including expensive open heart surgery. A consortium is required to
be formed, in different states between the Government, insurance
agencies, corporate hospitals and NGO's for providing integrated cost-
effective health care. The scheme when fully operational, can provide
direct employment for additional 600,000 doctors and 1.2 million
paramedical staff. Apart from providing health care to citizens, these
corporate hospitals can attract a large number of medical tourists to
the country in view of our competitiveness in treating complex diseases.
I am very happy to know that the scientific community for health is
working on anti-HIV vaccine development, which is in an advanced
stage of development. The success of this programme will be a
breakthrough in containing the HIV virus.
With the kind of awareness and opportunities available in ICT,
it will soon become a reality wherein every one of our villages will
have computers and connectivity available. These would be the window
to the world of knowledge for our villages and also to reap the benefits
of our e-governance, tele-education, tele-medicine, e-commerce and
e-judiciary initiatives. In spite of the all-pervasive nature of the
computers they would still be far away from being a truly friendly
access device for our villagers. We would need, in such cases, a human
intermediary who would act as the village information officer. He
will be the extended eyes and ears of the villager to the world of
knowledge. India has approximately 2.3 lakh Village Panchayats. I
visualize establishment of village knowledge centres in these Panchayats
to empower the villagers with the knowledge and to act as a nodal
centre for knowledge connectivity for the villagers. The knowledge
centre from which the villagers would access the information through
the village information officer can also be used for collection, digital
storage and dissemination of village-specific information to the villagers.
This will provide direct quality employment to over one million who
will be instrumental in promoting higher level of wealth generation
in our rural sector. The schemes discussed so far have the potential to
generate approximately a total of 56 million direct jobs during the
next 5 years. This does not include other employment avenues in the
government and the private sectors. Together creating 76 million jobs
in the next five years looks feasible if only we take up each of the
above schemes in mission mode.
I would like to give ten suggestions on the eve of this Republic
Day concerning the role of different constituents of our society in
implementing the various programmes leading to creation of
employment opportunities and wealth generation :
1. Education system should proactively build entrepreneurial
and vocational capacities in students. When they come out
of educational institutions they should have the confidence
to start small enterprises and also possess the skill to do it.
Above all the education system has to impart the spirit that
"we can do it".
2. Rural development has to be a mission mode operation
through PURA programme, which will enable provision of
maximum benefit to the villagers in a cost-effective way.
3. Banks have to provide hassle free loans to rural enterprises
and those who have creative ideas. The banks have to assist
them with venture capital. The existing agriculture and agro
processing credits have to be increased so that the agriculture
communities are empowered for enhancing the productivity
of the agricultural produce, food processing and marketing.
4. The Tsunami has caused severe damage to our coastal regions
and islands. Our fishermen and others living in those areas
have lost their dwellings and livelihood. While planning
the reconstruction of homes it is important to take the task
as an integrated PURA complex for promoting the prosperity
of the coastal region. This can include infrastructure for
fish storage and chilling plants, sea food processing and
marketing centres, boat and fishing net maintenance centres,
schools, hospitals, water sources and other small scale
46 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
5. In our country we have experience in certain government
departments in the field of defence, space, nuclear, agriculture
and Metro railway in executing mission mode projects. That
has resulted in the empowerment of the programme and
removal of normal administrative delays through empowered
management structure. Major programmes of the country
should use this mission mode management for employment
6. Since the broadband fibre connectivity has reached beyond
block level of districts and our satellite communication density
has also increased, this is the time for all our IT R&D and
ICT industrial establishments to reach out to the rural areas.
The e-govemance GRID should be established between state
and central governments with the National ID as the primary
database, linking all parts of the country for providing
Government to Government, Government to Citizen Access
and extending the tele-education, tele-medicine services to
the people in the rural areas.
7. Small scale industries are widespread in our country with
tremendous employment potential. For the dynamic and
competitive performance, the technological upgradation of
these units is essential in the national planning.
8. Media is indeed a dynamic and a creative system in our
democracy, and all the more it is important that the media
constituents reach out to the 6,00,000 villages of the country
and be active partners in the rural development. Artists have
a great role to play in the societal transformation.
9. Youth have to create a movement of making their own home
righteous, make their environment clean and excel in their
studies and their tasks.
10. The national parliamentary system should become the role
model for the nation: in legislative performance, in clean
and progressive administration and nobility and speedy
A new situation is emerging in the national scene in the year
2005. In the Indian history, very rarely we have come across a situation,
all at a time, an ascending economic trajectory, continuously rising
foreign exchange reserve, global recognition of technological
competence, emergence of our 540 million youth both men and women
as a dynamic positive force for national development, umbilical
connectivities of 20 million people of Indian origin in various parts
of the planet, and the interest shown by many developed countries to
invest in our engineers and scientists including setting up of new
R&D centres. This is the time the nation should launch series of missions
in the five areas, that is agriculture and food processing, education
and health care, information and communication technology,
infrastructure development and self reliance in critical technologies,
leading to transforming India into a developed nation by 2020.
Let us rededicate ourselves on this occasion of the 56th Republic
Day to build our nation as a nation which provides employment to
all, leading to economic prosperity and a nation of civilizational heritage
- Thirukkural (200 BC) 666
People who elevate the thoughts, through constant
reflection, and are steadfast in their action, will positively
achieve what they originally thought.
A Commitment to A Caring Polity
J KNOW I AM going to be with you for slightly more than one
hour. You are going to give me all your precious time. Definitely,
I am going to convey very important messages on behalf of my
Government. However, before starting, I would like to convey a small
poem, which I composed this morning in my mother tongue, titled
ITlb <5Tf5J^0<S. mLhr Meaning mm
Permit me to share with you this poem which will take a few
crrfj^l0a^lGn)n'Lb r&mb, OT<oh 5T0<stf)LD j5<smurT5G<siT,
QJIJSDfTfpp <oULq_GULD 0LD LDSrrff&mJllSld) J !0<5< ]<ohGp[TLD.
LD<5<S<STT TTj<Stf)LD GsL<^lpniT5<STT, LD<5<5<STT p<otf)LD G<5Ll<SprT[T5<STT;
(STffjffiGTTgJ QJITLpGfi]fT)0 <olJ<STTrbjQ<5fT@nhj<5<STT, ^<SrflQ<5!T TEJ5<siT,
<ST5J5<STT5J T7jd)g)j<Stf)LpuGLJ, (ST ^5(405(5, ^<Sff]<sfl<STT<50.
^_ujrTiT)^li - <oDrri_b pn'QuDsbajnib, ^smtisolduSIGsd i [t ^^ms^rrisb"
^]IJ5<oiTT (STQJQJL^GuJT, 0L j. <STT ^QJOjySlGlLI,
QJ TT0rBJ5<STT (ST SWOT <5 $9), _UJ0lij5<STT 0<5UJ<S\fi<sb J IT,
<SDfTUJ<SOLD)(Lp<S?r)p 2_lil<5(Gf5<50 QJL^]^ l<oOSMTlU[TLlJ <J|{0L_@LD,
jSsfllfT <ST<sbGGDTT0Lb QJTTLp<s! ^SOp50CT)<SMUJfT<sb <ST<ohQp6hfp|Lb.
Address to Parliament, New Delhi, 25 February 2005
Where are we now, dear friends,
In the Maha Sabha that shapes as history
The call of heartbeats of Indian people,
People ask us, people ask us;
"Oh! Parliamentarians, the sculptors of Mother India,
Lead us unto light, enrich our lives.
Your righteous toil is our guiding light,
If you work hard, we all can prosper."
Like King, so the people,
Nurture great thoughts, rise up in actions,
May righteous methods be your guide;
May you all prosper ever with Almighty's grace.
I am delighted to address the first session of both Houses of
Parliament in the New Year. My greetings to all of you. We entered
the New Year with mixed feelings. On the one hand, there were so
many reasons for us to look forward to this year with hope and optimism;
on the other hand, the entire nation was deeply moved by the tsunami
tragedy. Induced by a major earthquake in the ocean bed near Sumatra
on the 26th of December 2004, a tsunami wave hit the Andaman and
Nicobar Islands and the coastal areas of Tamil Nadu, Pondicherry,
Kerala and Andhra Pradesh. Our hearts reached out to those who saw
their loved ones taken away by a killer wave that washed away the
lives and livelihoods of thousands of our people. The entire nation
shared the agony of those whose lives and livelihoods were destroyed
Honourable Members will agree with me, however, that the silver
lining to this dark cloud was the spontaneous response of our people
in coming to the aid of the victims in their hour of need. Apart from
the fact that contributions to the Prime Minister's National Relief
Fund have been unprecedented, millions of Indians and friends from
50 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
overseas have contributed in their own way, directly and indirectly,
to provide relief and facilitate rehabilitation of the affected people.
I must place on record the nation's appreciation of the rescue,
relief and rehabilitation work undertaken by state and local governments,
the armed forces and non-government organisations. Given the nature
of the disaster and the fact that this part of the world had not been
visited upon by a tsunami in the living memory of anyone in this
region, there was an element of surprise. This was compounded by
the fact that the worst affected places were in the far-flung Andaman
and Nicobar Islands. Yet, our response was quick. The Indian Navy,
Air Force, Coast Guard and Central Paramilitary Forces played a heroic
role in providing immediate relief not just to our people but also to
the affected people in Sri Lanka, Maldives, Indonesia and Thailand.
My Government very correctly took the view that external
assistance was not required for the immediate rescue and relief work.
This work was best done by local authorities and security forces and
the resources required were available with State and Central
governments. India thanks all those who expressed their concern and
generously extended their help. We are open to external assistance
and advice in rebuilding and reconstructing the destroyed economies
and ecologies of the coastal region. We must convert this tragedy
into an opportunity by modernising the maritime economy and
protecting the coastal ecology.
It is imperative that the momentum generated by our response
in the relief and rehabilitation phase is sustained in the reconstruction
phase. I hope that we would be able to demonstrate our reconstruction
effort as a model of effective, humane and forward-looking public
intervention in disaster mitigation.
The Government will shortly create a National Disaster
Management Authority. A Central legislation on disaster management
will soon be introduced in Parliament. I would recommend that this
Authority should have a strong science and technology component
built into its activities. We have to develop a long-term strategy in
science and technology for dealing with natural disasters and threats
to the ecology of our coastal areas. The need for such an Authority
becomes even more pressing in view of the extensive loss to life and
property caused by calamities such as the recent avalanches in Jammu
and Kashmir resulting from heavy snowfall. The nation shares the
grief of the people of Jammu and Kashmir in their hour of sorrow.
The generous response of the people of our country to the tsunami
tragedy showed once again that there has been a paradigm shift in
our political and social milieu. Those of us, who have been concerned
about the social trend towards personal aggrandisement and a political
trend towards the politics of exclusion, would have been heartened
by the genuine altruism and the sense of inclusiveness that characterised
the mood of the nation in the aftermath of the tsunami.
My Government is committed to an inclusive society, a caring
polity and a sharing economy. This is the essence of the National
Common Minimum Programme adopted by the constituents of the
United Progressive Alliance and supported by the Left and other like-
minded parties. The UPA's vital contribution to the nation has been
the return of the polity to mainstream political values of pluralism,
inclusiveness, secularism and economic growth with equity and social
justice. The people of India have repeatedly reaffirmed their commitment
to these core values of our nationhood.
My Government has been able to enthuse people to re-focus their
energies on economic development and social progress. Not surprisingly,
a sense of optimism now pervades the country and we can look forward
to a year of improved economic performance, communal harmony
and political stability. All major economic indicators are looking up
and investors have regained their faith in our potential. I believe we
must capture this mood of optimism combined with altruism to
strengthen the foundations of our inclusive democracy.
In the span of three quarters of a year that the United Progressive
Alliance Government has been in office, considerable time and energy
has already been devoted to the implementation of the National Common
Minimum Programme. More importantly, an environment of social
and political stability based on a commitment to the welfare of weaker
52 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
sections, especially the scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, other
backward classes and minorities has been created. The Government
has sustained the process of economic growth with due regard for
equity and social justice. It has ensured communal harmony and imparted
a new sense of hope to the minorities and the weaker sections of
society. My Government has infused a new sense of belonging among
various disaffected groups, especially in the North-Eastern States and
among the tribal communities across the country. The handing over
of the historic Kangla Fort to the people of Manipur was not just a
glorious moment in the history of the Manipuri people; it also
symbolized my Government's commitment to all segments of our
society that they have a right to live a life of dignity and self-respect.
It is with this same message that the Prime Minister visited the State
of Jammu and Kashmir, to empathise with the people living in the
Kashmir Valley, and migrant Kashmiri pandits in Jammu.
My Government has constituted a Commission for the welfare
of socially and economically backward sections among religious and
linguistic minorities. This Commission will examine the social and
economic status of these deprived groups and suggest mechanisms
for enhancing their educational, employment and economic
opportunities. We will also prepare a White Paper on the status of
minority communities in India. Subsequently, the Government will
recast the 15-point programme for the welfare of the minorities with
a view to incorporating programme-specific interventions.
Adivasis in this country have been leading a life of insecurity in
many areas since their property rights have remained unsettled. It is
necessary to recognize their need for assured property and land rights
in areas they have been residing in for several generations. It is an
irony that tribals who have been living in "forest villages" and have
been practising agriculture on these lands for several generations,
have not been given due recognition of their rights. Their problems
are engaging the attention of the Government and we will try to settle
the issue of land rights of tribals. The outcome will be beneficial
both to tribals and to the goal of forest conservation.
My Government believes that it is its responsibility to ensure
that the deprived sections of society are given a fair deal. We are
committed to taking steps for their educational and economic
empowerment. We should also take simultaneous action to protect
their human rights and also free them from age-old prejudices. The
Government will take legal action to ban the degrading practice of
manual scavenging, and States would be given time up to August
2005 to enforce it. My Government is equally committed to the
upliftment and empowerment of physically and mentally challenged
It is absolutely essential that the deprived sections of our society
benefit from the growth processes we have unleashed. The Government
has constituted a Group of Ministers to engage in a dialogue with
industry to explore mechanisms for increasing employment
opportunities for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the private
sector. The Government has introduced the Reservation Bill in
Parliament codifying all provisions on reservation in government. In
addition, a Committee of Ministers on Dalit Affairs has been formed
to give focused attention to all issues related to the welfare of Dalits.
Honourable Members, an important commitment of the National
Common Minimum Programme that the Government has fulfilled
has been to hold the price line. Owing to the impact of a weak monsoon
as well as the steep increase in international energy prices, the rate of
inflation had gone up in the middle of last year. However, despite
continued pressure on the oil price front, a judicious mix of economic
policies and administrative intervention has helped bring the rate of
inflation down. After rising above 8.0% in August 2004, the rate of
inflation, as measured by the wholesale price index, has come down
to 5.0%. The rate of inflation as measured by the consumer price
index has declined and is significantly lower than the wholesale price
index. My Government is committed to reining in the rate of inflation
as it hurts the poor the most. The Government's success in bringing
the rate of inflation down has been the most important of the many
pro-poor interventions it has been able to make in the past nine months.
The Government will remain steadfast in its resolve to hold the price
line and protect the real incomes of the poor.
54 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
The control of inflation forms a reassuring backdrop to the revival
of investment and business activity in the economy. All macro-economic
indicators are looking up. On top of a year of record growth in 2003-
04, which was based largely on a recovery from the previous year's
poor growth, the economy is once again poised to record close to
7.0% growth in 2004-05, despite a weaker monsoon and higher oil
prices. The revival of investment activity and an increase in the rate
of capital formation have contributed to an annual growth in 2004-05
of 8.9% in manufacturing output and 8.9% in services sector incomes.
Despite a modest 1.1% growth in agricultural production on account
of a weak monsoon, food prices have been under check.
Foreign trade has been growing at a rapid pace with exports rising
by 25.6% and imports by 34.7% in US dollar terms in the period
April-January 2004-05. Investment, both domestic and foreign, has
been rising and is a measure of the confidence of investors in our
economy. In order to accelerate investment activity further by removing
policy and operational constraints the Government has constituted
an Investment Commission. While foreign exchange reserves continue
to remain at record levels, the revival of investment activity and the
consequent increase in import demand has stabilized the rate of
accumulation. Overall, all macro-economic indicators are robust and
positive and there is an air of optimism in the economy and the markets.
My Government will pursue policies that will sustain this recovery
and accelerate growth, moving forward on the twin roads of efficiency
and equity, while maintaining a high degree of fiscal and financial
The core commitments of the National Common Minimum
Programme are the seven priority areas of Agriculture, Education,
Employment, Health care, Infrastructure, Urban Renewal and Water.
My Government is committed to giving a "New Deal To Rural
India". This "new deal" involves, among other things: reversing the
declining trend in investment in agriculture; stepping up credit flow
to farmers; enhancing public investment in irrigation and wasteland
development; increasing funds for agricultural research and extension;
creating a 'single market' for agricultural produce; investing in rural
health care and education; promoting rural electrification and rural
roads; setting up commodities futures markets and insuring against
risk in farming and rural business.
One of the first steps that my Government took in office last
year was to effect a steep increase in credit flow to agriculture. The
entire country was deeply distressed by the misfortune of several farmers
in parts of the country, some of whom were driven to desperation and
suicide. My government took several measures to address the distress
of the affected families and undertook many initiatives to ease the
flow of credit to farmers. A special package for doubling the agricultural
credit flow in the next three years and for providing credit-related
relief to farmers was announced in June 2004. As against the targeted
agricultural credit flow of Rs. 1,05,000 crore for the year, as much as
Rs.99,240 crore had already been provided by the end of January
2005, amounting to nearly 95% of the target. To protect farmers from
the vagaries of nature and the uncertainties of the market, the
Government has taken several initiatives to provide farm and farm
income insurance. The Farm Income Insurance Scheme that was being
implemented for Rabi crops has since been extended to Kharif crops
also. The modernization of the meteorological forecasting system will
also contribute to improvement in our agricultural performance by
providing more accurate forecasts of weather patterns.
Horticulture is one of the areas identified for priority attention,
for which a National Horticulture Mission is proposed to be launched.
This initiative, the details of which will be outlined by the Finance
Minister in his Budget Speech, has the potential of transforming the
rural landscape and also our export profile of agricultural products.
The problem of water availability and utilization has received
special attention in the National Common Minimum Programme. Water
is a national resource, and we have to take an integrated view of our
country's water resources, our needs, our policies and our water
utilization practices. We need to ensure the equitable use of scarce
water resources. I urge you and all our political leaders to take a national
and holistic view of the challenge of managing our water resources.
56 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
We need mass action for the conservation of water. People have
demonstrated their capacity to take leadership in this area. My
Government proposes to promote water conservation and water
harvesting in a major way, through a people's movement. Current
programmes for dry land farming and artificial recharge would provide
technical support for such a mission, while the investment that is
proposed under the wage employment programmes would provide
the funds for a citizen citizen- and community-led movement for water
conservation. Existing programmes of watershed management would
complement this effort, which would also be on a watershed basis.
This would address the issue of increasing water availability, especially
in our arid and semi-arid regions.
The Government has proposed to launch a new scheme to promote
micro irrigation, including drip and sprinkler irrigation in rain-deficient
areas. Public-Private Partnership is also crucial for the development
of the agriculture sector, especially in rural infrastructure.
The problem of seasonal flooding in the Brahmaputra Valley
and in the Gangetic plains is engaging the attention of the Government.
To identify long-term solutions and to harness the Brahmaputra and
Baraak rivers, the Government has set up a Committee to examine
the feasibility of setting up a North East Valley Authority. Financial
allocations for the Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP)
have been increased. The Union Budget 2004-05 has taken steps to
support water-harvesting schemes for SC/ST farmers. Water
management in all its aspects, both for irrigation and drinking purposes,
will receive urgent attention. The Government is also pursuing all
water-related issues with neighbouring countries in a spirit of co
Agricultural research and extension will be another area of priority
for my Government. Funding for agricultural research is being stepped
up. New centres of excellence will be promoted to increase the number
of agricultural scientists and graduates to enable the further
modernization of agriculture. A "New Deal For Rural India" also
requires revitalization of the institutions of rural development. My
Government's commitment to grassroots democracy is reflected in
the creation of a new Ministry of Panchayati Raj. In consultation
with Chief Ministers, the Ministry has drawn up a 150-point Action
Plan covering 18 aspects of Panchayati Raj. The Government will
actively involve Panchayati Raj institutions in the implementation of
development programmes. The co-operative sector has also been an
important instrument of agricultural development in our country. The
Government is committed to strengthening co-operatives by infusing
a professional management culture and restoring their democratic
character. A scheme for the revitalization of the co-operative credit
structure has been prepared by NABARD.
A National Committee on Rural Infrastructure has been constituted
under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister to ensure that urban
amenities and infrastructural facilities are made available in rural areas.
A Rural Electrification Strategy has been drawn up to create a rural
Electricity Distribution Backbone and Village Electricity Infrastructure.
My Government is committed to the objective of providing electricity
to all villages in the country by the year 2009. The infrastructure gap
between urban and rural areas has to be closed and employment,
livelihood and investment opportunities have to be made available in
rural areas. This will also discourage distress migration to towns that
has imposed enormous pressure on urban infrastructure. We must
improve rural roads, schools and health care facilities and public services
in a planned manner.
There are many other initiatives that my Government has taken
that will greatly benefit the agrarian economy and people living in
rural areas. These include programmes and policies aimed at
strengthening and modernizing rural infrastructure and improving rural
health and education. Taken together, all these initiatives constitute a
major developmental thrust for our agrarian economy. That India lives
in its villages may be a worn out cliche, but it is a reality that we must
constantly remember. Until our citizens living in rural India, especially
the farmers and the weaker sections are economically and socially
empowered, India cannot shine. My Government wants India to shine,
but it must shine for all!
58 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
A second area of special attention for my Government is
employment. It is a priority for a country in which the share of the
youth in our population is rising and will continue to rise for some
decades to come. The policies aimed at increasing investment and
stepping up the growth rate of agriculture, manufacturing, infrastructure
and the services sector will undoubtedly generate new employment
opportunities. To take care of those who are likely to be left behind
by development processes and to ensure that there is a safety net,
especially in some of the more backward regions of the country, my
Government has come forward with a National Employment Guarantee
Bill. This bill, before Parliament, will provide legal guarantee for at
least 100 days of employment to at least one person in every poor
household initially in some of the most backward districts of the country.
This programme is to be gradually expanded to cover all rural areas.
In the interim, the government has also launched a National Food-
for-Work Programme in 150 backward districts. The programme was
launched from a backward district of Andhra Pradesh on the birth
anniversary of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. Fifty lakh additional families
have been issued Anthyodaya Cards, taking the total up to 2 crore
Ours has been a knowledge-based civilization for millennia and
yet we remain a country with an unacceptably high rate of illiteracy.
Today our best and brightest are at the forefront of the global knowledge
economy, and yet many of our schools and colleges are unable to
meet the aspirations of all those who seek the light of knowledge.
This must change. India needs a new knowledge revolution, a new
wave of investment in education at all levels of the knowledge pyramid,
from elementary schools in villages to world-class research institutions.
My Government will give priority to issues of both access and excellence
Resources for elementary education have been augmented through
the Education Cess, which will form the Praarumbhik Shiksha Kosh.
This will enable better funding of the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, Kasturba
Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya, the Mid-day Meal Scheme, and Nutrition
Programme for Adolescent Girls. The National Mission for Sarva
Shiksha Abhiyan has been constituted for the first time. The launch
of EDUSAT, an educational satellite, and of Doordarshan's Direct-
To-Home (DTH) television facility will enable us to use modern
technology in spreading literacy. My Government has also given special
attention to the educational development of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and minorities. A National Commission for Minority Educational
Institutions has been established to safeguard the interests of institutes
of higher learning set up by minorities.
The Universities of Allahabad and Manipur are being given the
status of Central Universities and a special grant has been given to
Jamia Millia Islamia. The Government has also sanctioned an Indian
Institute of Management for the North-East and has agreed to aid
faculty development at Kashmir University.
These are some of the first steps taken by my Government to
improve the educational system. Much more needs to be done and
will be done. We need a modern educational system that promotes
secular values and creates concerned, committed and competent citizens
capable of meeting the challenges of the 21 st century. We must inculcate
in our people greater curiosity about the world around us and promote
a scientific temper. The future of our great nation depends on the
quality and content of our educational system. The Government has
already announced its intent to set up a National Knowledge Commission
to give India the knowledge edge in the 21 st century. This Knowledge
Commission would have five prongs: increasing access to knowledge
for public benefit, nurturing knowledge concepts in Universities,
knowledge creation in S&T laboratories, promoting application of
knowledge in our business and industry, and using knowledge to
improve service delivery in Government. The development of basic
science and of science and technology will receive the Government's
highest priority. The Government is committed to the promotion of
public-private partnerships in R&D, especially in bio-technology, space
and defence technologies and to increase funding for frontier areas
of scientific and technological research.
Another priority area for policy action is health care. A major
commitment of the Government is to increase the spending on public
health from the present level of 0.9% of GDP to 2.0% over the next
60 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
five years, and to improve the delivery of primary health services,
especially in rural areas for poor people. My Government proposes
to launch a National Rural Health Mission, which will be based on a
district-based planning and management model, of health care delivery,
with the involvement of Panchayati Raj institutions. This decentralized
model of health management will, for the first time, enable localized
solutions to health problems, and hopefully will lead to the goal of
My Government will also pay special attention to the development
of urban infrastructure and to making our towns and cities more livable.
For a country where more than a third of the population lives in urban
areas, it is time to focus on the task of providing world-class
infrastructure and access to basic amenities in towns and cities. This
will enable our cities to play the role of magnets of economic growth
effectively. A proposed Mission on Urban Renewal will address this
A key priority area for my Government is infrastructure. If the
Government's objective of enabling the economy to log 7% to 8%
growth over the next decade has to be realized, the country will require
massive investment in infrastructure. There is urgent need to increase
public and private investment in power, roads, railways, ports and
inland waterways, civil aviation and housing. A Committee on
Infrastructure has been constituted under the chairmanship of the Prime
Minister. Our economy requires at least up to $150 billion worth of
investment in the infrastructure sector over the next decade to catch
up with our East Asian neighbours.
The Committee on Infrastructure has already laid down a road
map for a new Civil Aviation Policy that will improve aviation services,
promote domestic airlines, modernize civil aviation infrastructure and
offer consumers wider choice. The adhocism and lack of transparency
that characterized civil aviation policy in the past, has been replaced
by a transparent, forward-looking policy framework that will encourage
new investment in this sector. The Government has decided to grant
greater autonomy to the National Highways Authority of India, while
taking steps to make it more professional and efficient. The rate of
completion of road construction under the national highways
programme, especially the Golden Quadrilateral and the North-South
and East-West corridors, has been speeded up. The Government will
encourage public-private partnership in all infrastructure projects.
Special focus will be given to improving rail and road connectivity
in the North-Eastern region. My Government is in the process of setting
up appropriate mechanisms for this purpose. Road and rail development
in Jammu & Kashmir will also be accorded higher priority with the
upgradation of several historic links such as the Mughal Road.
The success of our telecom policy over the past decade has
demonstrated the benefits of pursuing a liberal policy in the infrastructure
sector. The beneficiary of such a policy will, in the final analysis, be
the consumer. My Government plans to increase India's tele-density
from a lowly 8.4% today to more than 20% by 2008. The priority
will be to provide both voice and data transmission connectivity in
rural areas. The broadband policy announced recently would enhance
Internet connectivity with increased speed. This, in turn, would help
our rural areas to take advantage of the benefits of e-governance, e-
education and e-health. The digital divide between rural and urban
areas must be bridged expeditiously, since it is possible for us to
leapfrog into next generation information technology.
The National Electricity Policy adopted by my Government will
encourage new investment in the sector, while ensuring that the interests
of consumers, including rural consumers, are also served. The success
of the Inter Institutional Group in facilitating financial closure of 11
private power projects with an aggregate capacity of over 4000 MW,
envisaging a funds commitment of over Rs. 13,000 crores, augurs
well for future investment in this sector. The initiatives of my
Government have significantly boosted the confidence of private
promoters and financing institutions in reiterating their commitment
to fund viable private power projects. The public response to the sale
of Government equity in the National Thermal Power Corporation
along with the issue of fresh equity by it through an Initial Public
Offer in November 2004 bears great promise for policy initiatives in
62 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
To sustain the anticipated increase in our economic growth rate,
we have to ensure access to energy. Energy security is, therefore, a
key national priority. My Government has taken several steps, both
economic and diplomatic, to enhance India's energy security. Public
sector undertakings have a key role to play in facing competitive
challenges, both domestically and internationally. There is a need for
the oil PSUs to leverage their strengths in their respective areas of
core competence to optimally fulfil the key role envisaged for them
in promoting the national objectives of energy security, accelerated
growth rate and sustained economic development. With this in view,
an advisory committee on Synergy in Energy has been constituted.
My Government launched the 5th Round of New Exploration Licensing
Policy on 4th January 2005, providing attractive investment
opportunities for companies to explore oil and gas. In addition, my
Government will give the highest priority to developing strategies to
enhance our capabilities in harnessing alternative sources of energy
for our long-term energy requirements.
While these seven areas of concern to our people will receive
the priority attention of the Government, emphasis will also be placed
on other important sectors, especially the modernization and
development of our manufacturing and services sectors. The decline
in the share of manufacturing in national income in recent years is a
matter of concern. My Government has set up a National Manufacturing
Competitiveness Council to increase the productivity of our
manufacturing sector, which is vital for maintaining its competitive
position in a world where trade barriers are being removed. My
Government will give high priority to the acceleration of industrial
development at home. There are immense opportunities in a wide
range of manufacturing industries, including textiles and garments,
automobiles and auto-components, leather and pharmaceuticals that
will be tapped. This will receive the special attention of my Government.
The end of the Multi-Fibre Agreement opens up new opportunities
for external trade in the textiles sector that Indian industry must tap.
The Government will take all necessary steps and reforms to encourage
investment in this sector. India has enormous advantages in the textiles
sector, both traditional and modern, and must regain its pre-eminent
position in the world market. The revamping of the Khadi and Village
Industries Commission should also help in encouraging the growth
of the much neglected handloom sector. My Government will encourage
the modernization of handlooms and promote their design and marketing
capabilities. The plight of weavers has been engaging public attention
for quite sometime, but not enough has been done in this regard. My
Government proposes to focus on improving the situation of wea vers
through a time-bound programme spanning the next two years, to be
called "Two Years For The Weavers". Under this programme, traditional
looms would be replaced, design capability would be improved for
value addition and weavers given access to new technology, credit
and markets. Professionals would be incentivised to connect Indian
weavers to premium markets where Indian handloom still commands
upmarket attention. The biggest challenge in promoting the growth
of the manufacturing sector is to promote Brand India, the "Made in
Over 90% of our labour force is in the informal sector. My
Government will set up an appropriate institutional and regulatory
mechanism to ensure their welfare. While striving for improved social
protection, we must also not lose sight of the need to augment
employment opportunities through a judicious mix of incentives and
regulation. A National Commission has been appointed to examine
the problems of enterprises in the unorganized, informal sector and
to make recommendations on providing technical, marketing and credit
support to small and tiny enterprises and to self-employed persons in
this sector. Based on the recommendations of this Commission, we
will design appropriate programmes to ensure that the informal sector
blossoms, not only in economic performance but also as a provider
of employment opportunities. A Board for Reconstruction of Public
Sector Enterprises has been set up to devolve full managerial and
commercial autonomy to successful public sector companies while
at the same time working out solutions to the problems of loss making
Economic Development and the welfare and socio-economic
empowerment of our people are my Government's topmost priorities.
There are, however, forces at work that are inimical to the realization
64 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
of these objectives. My Government is determined to deal with all
such threats to peace and national security. My Government is fully
alive to the internal and external challenges to our national security.
It will not hesitate in taking any steps required to deal with the threat
of terrorism or attempts to spread disaffection and disturb law and
order. The overall internal security situation in the country remained
under control in 2004. The three main areas of challenge to our national
security have been identified as cross-border terrorism in Jammu and
Kashmir, insurgency in the North-East region and Naxalite violence
in some states. We need a multi-faceted approach to meet this challenge.
The machinery for the enforcement of law and order has to be made
more effective. At the same time, we must also deal with the underlying
causes that give rise to a feeling of alienation among a section of the
people, the large majority of whom wish to live in peace and security.
Administration at all levels must become more focused on equitable
and people-centred development. My Government would pay equal
attention to the development dimension and human rights concerns.
In dealing with these threats, my Government was of the view
that the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002, had been misused and
that this Act was in fact not required since existing laws could adequately
handle the menace of terrorism. The Government therefore repealed
POT A and amended the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967,
to put in place a legal regime to deal with the various facets of terrorism.
This does not in any way imply a weakening of our resolve to deal
with elements inimical to our national security. The Government will
invest in the welfare of our security forces and in the modernization
My Government is committed to paying equal attention to the
genuine concerns of the people and redressing their grievances. It
will take steps to accelerate the tempo of social and economic
development so that young people in Jammu and Kashmir have ample
opportunity to live a life of dignity, self-respect and prosperity. In
pursuit of peace and normalcy, my Government has repeatedly expressed
its willingness to talk to any group provided they abjure the path of
violence. Cross-border terrorism remains a potential threat both in
our west and east, even though there has been a decline in the number
of terrorist attacks in Jammu and Kashmir in recent months. The
infrastructure of terrorism has not been dismantled across the border.
The Government has accorded topmost priority to the erection of fencing
on the India-Bangladesh border to contain infiltration, smuggling and
other anti-India activities from across the border.
Activities of underground groups and ethnic tensions have
continued to vitiate the atmosphere in some parts of the North-Eastern
States. We are committed to restoring normalcy, so that people of the
North-Eastern region can live normal lives and prosper economically.
My Government is willing to engage any group abjuring violence in
a meaningful dialogue. It is with this spirit that the Government is
engaged in a dialogue with various groups in the North-Eastern States.
Our government will pay adequate attention to accelerating the pace
of development in the North-Eastern region and to ensure that this
development takes into account their legitimate aspirations.
The economic development of Jammu and Kashmir and of the
North-Eastern States will receive the special attention of my
Government. The Government has prepared a plan for the reconstruction
and development of the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The infrastructural
components of the plan would revitalize the State's ailing tourism
industry, create new capabilities and generate employment opportunities.
The successful implementation of the proposed projects would require
improved governance, transparent and corruption-free administration,
peace, security, the rule of law, fiscal responsibility and the economic
pricing of public utilities.
To guide the economic development of the North-Eastern States,
the North-Eastern Council is being rejuvenated and expanded. My
Government is pleased by the favourable response of the people of
Manipur to its decision to constitute an independent group to examine
the provisions of the Armed Forces Special Powers Act. This Group
will recommend whether to modify the existing Act or replace it with
a more humane law to address the requirements of national security
while respecting the human rights of our people. The region needs a
new agenda of hope. The doors of the Government are always open
to all groups who are committed to the economic upliftment and the
66 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
social and political empowerment of the region. There is no issue, no
grievance that is so intractable that it cannot be resolved through a
patient, constructive dialogue. This is the only possible way forward.
Our democratic system is open enough, and flexible enough to welcome
the participation of all shades of opinion. In the final analysis, power
in India can only flow from the ballot box; never from the barrel of a
My Government also remains firmly committed to ensuring
communal harmony. The National Integration Council has been
reconstituted. A Model Comprehensive Law to deal with communal
violence is on the anvil. My Government will deal resolutely with
any attempts to spread communal ism, disturb law and order and deny
a life of peace and security to any citizen. The menace of Naxalism is
posing a threat to peace and security in many parts of the country.
Each State Government will have to devise means to deal with this
threat by distinguishing between the genuine demands of the
downtrodden and the nefarious designs of anti-national elements. My
Government is committed to the welfare of all weaker sections, and
will encourage a dialogue with all political forces interested in promoting
the welfare of the people in a peaceful manner. However, it will deal
effectively with any group challenging the Constitutional authority
of a democratically elected Government and resorting to the use of
Modernization of our Armed Forces is one of the priority areas
of the Government included in the National Common Minimum
Programme. There has been an increase in the allocation of funds for
modernization of the Armed Forces. Modernization projects of the
Army, Navy and Air Force are well in hand. A number of new projects
for induction of various equipment and weapon systems are in progress.
In the Department of Defence Research and Development, three
prototypes of the Light Combat Aircraft 'Tejas' are undergoing flight-
testing and have completed 307 test flights including supersonic flights.
The Integrated Electronic Warfare System 'Samyukta5 has been
successfully evaluated and accepted by the Army. 'Sangraha', an
electronic warfare system for the Navy, has been accepted and
production orders placed. The 'Nag' third generation anti-tank missile
and 4Akash' surface to air missile have undergone successful flight
tests. The supersonic cruise missile BrahMos, a joint venture programme
with Russia, has been successfully tested for the anti-ship role and is
ready for induction. The Main Battle Tank "Arjun" has been successfully
inducted into the Army.
As announced in the Common Minimum Programme, a separate
Department of Ex-servicemen's Welfare has been created in the Ministry
of Defence. This department would give a special focus and thrust to
ex-servicemen's welfare. A Ministry for Overseas Indian Affairs has
been created to give focused attention to issues related to the large
diaspora of persons of Indian origin in different parts of the world.
My Government is committed to the reform of Government and
to making it more transparent, responsive and efficient. A Model Code
of Good Governance for public servants is being drawn up as part of
a comprehensive reform of administration and administrative
procedures. The Government will set up an Administrative Reforms
Commission to prepare a blueprint for revamping the public
administration system. The enactment of the Right to Information
Act will empower citizens and oblige authorities to be more transparent.
As part of the Government's efforts to enhance the quality of governance,
a number of new initiatives are proposed to be taken to ensure that
government functionaries, at all levels, are properly trained to discharge
their responsibilities, and citizens have an effective mechanism for
My Government's foreign policy is based on the centrality of
national interests in the conduct of our external relations and the pursuit
of our economic interests. The Government has taken important
initiatives, keeping in mind the imperative of retaining our freedom
of options, remaining alive to our concerns. The Government's efforts
have contributed to making the international environment for India's
development more secure. We have articulated our positions and views
clearly so that India's foreign partners have a better appreciation of
the logic of our position on issues of importance to us.
My Government has accorded primary attention to relations with
>ur neighbours and strengthening SAARC. It is my Government's
68 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
earnest desire to work with all our neighbours to create a neighbourhood
of shared prosperity and peace. We will reaffirm the importance we
attach to realizing the potential inherent in SAARC at its forthcoming
Summit meeting. Our approach to our neighbours is founded on the
conviction that the peoples of our region have a desire for enhanced
co-operation, overcoming perceived barriers and inhibitions. Our effort
will be to consolidate and expand traditional friendship while we work
to nurture newer partnerships. We value our specially close relationship
with Bhutan and we will strive to build on this. We have had the
privilege of a special and warm relationship with Bangladesh. India
was among the earliest to rush relief and assistance to both Sri Lanka
and Maldives, which suffered the impact of the tsunami. This even
while we ourselves were coping with the effects of the tsunami in our
coastal areas, and assessing the extent of our damage, demonstrates
the importance we attach to these relationships and our commitment
to good neighbourly ties. The Comprehensive Economic Partnership
Agreement with Sri Lanka will further deepen our economic co
operation. President Karzai's recent visit will strengthen our participation
in Afghanistan's reconstruction efforts.
Our relations with Pakistan are of utmost importance in our
endeavour to create a neighbourhood of peace, stability and prosperity.
We are engaged in a serious dialogue with Pakistan and have taken
several initiatives in furtherance of that. In proposing a range of steps,
including Confidence Building Measures that may be taken in the
near term, leading up to longer term economic co-operation, we are
responding to the felt desire of our peoples. However, the process of
normalisation is critically dependent on Pakistan fulfilling its assurance
that it would end its support to terrorist activities.
The India-Pakistan process was recently taken significantly
forward. An agreement was reached to start a bus service between
Srinagar and Muzaffarabad. It was also agreed in principle to start
bus services between Lahore and Amritsar, including to religious places
such as Nankaana Sahib. Pakistan also agreed to work towards early
restoration of the Khokrapar to Munabao rail link. These measures
would enhance people-to-people contacts, which have also provided
palpable support to the present process.
Our relationship with Nepal will continue to receive high priority
and it remains our view that the problems that Nepal faces today can
only be addressed by a constitutional Monarchy and multi-party
democracy working together harmoniously on the basis of a national
consensus. India has expressed grave concern following the dissolution
of the multi-party Government, declaration of emergency and arrest
of political leaders by His Majesty the King of Nepal on February 1,
We greatly value our relations with our major economic partners.
India-US relations are on a steady course as they draw on the enduring
affinity between our two countries as democracies and as strategic
partners. We will continue to build upon the convergences in this
relationship, strengthening our bilateral economic interface and the
vibrant people-to-people contacts. Our ties with the European Union
and its 25 member states have expanded steadily, and on our part, we
will work to add momentum to the strategic partnership on which we
have embarked, including at the next India-EU Summit in New Delhi
this year. We value our time tested and strategic partnership with
Russia, which was strengthened by the recent visit of the President of
the Russian Federation. The depth of our co-operation illustrates the
priority we attach to deepening and consolidating this important
relationship. My government has sought to accelerate our dialogue
and engagement with China and we look forward to the visit of its
Premier as an important bilateral landmark.
The "Look East Policy" has substantially strengthened our linkages
with Japan, the member countries of ASEAN and the Republic of
Korea. We expect the forthcoming visit of the Prime Minister of Japan
to be a significant event in our bilateral ties. Our relationship with
ASEAN has taken on new dimensions and we hope to realise its huge
potential. India's effective presence at the ASEAN Summit in November
2004 and the success of the first BIMSTEC Summit in July 2004,
helped us forge closer links with our eastern neighbours.
The convergence of our foreign policy and our domestic needs
is striking in the context of our energy security. My Government will
give full importance to synchronising our diplomatic activity with
70 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
our need for energy to fuel our developmental needs. Our established
and traditional interests in West Asia, the Gulf and proximate regions,
including the substantial presence there of our citizens, shall continue
to be reflected in our interactions. We remain committed to the efforts
of the international community in finding a just and durable solution
to the problems that the Palestinian people have faced, so that they
may achieve a State of their own. At the same time, we attach high
importance to our friendly relations with Israel, which we hope to
The forthcoming 50th anniversary of the Bandung Conference
will be an important occasion to recall a historic initiative taken at a
time when the process of decolonisation was starting to gather strength
and which prefigured the values of the Non-Aligned Movement. In
this spirit, we will continue to pursue the comprehensive exercise to
broaden the range of our relations with countries in Africa and Latin
America, on which we have embarked. We will also reaffirm our
commitment to the values of the Commonwealth at its Summit meeting
in November this year.
This year, we also mark the 60th anniversary of the end of the
Second World War and the founding of the United Nations Organization.
It is our firm belief that the problems that confront the world today
are truly global and are problems without borders, which call for
collective approaches. We will play an active and constructive role
in all deliberations of global concern. There is growing recognition
of India's legitimate aspiration to play a larger role in the UN, consistent
with our status and strength. We attach importance to the process of
reform of the United Nations as part of the necessary renewal of the
Organisation and we intend to articulate forcefully our aspiration to
permanent membership of the UN Security Council.
This is a year of many anniversaries. This year we celebrate
the Platinum Jubilee of the Dandi March and the Salt Satyagraha
launched by the Father of our Nation, Mahatma Gandhi. I hope the
entire nation will recall the spirit of idealism and self-sacrifice that
characterized this High Noon of our freedom struggle. With nothing
more than the salt of our own land, Gandhiji made colonial rule
unacceptable in a non-violent manner that captured the imagination
of the entire world.
In commemorating the Salt Satyagraha, every Indian must
rediscover pride in our quest for freedom and self-respect and recapture
the confidence shown by our forefathers who won us liberation from
colonial rule. We have come a long way in these 75 years. Today
India stands tall in the comity of nations, as an independent Republic
committed to the principles of freedom, secularism, pluralism and
the welfare of all.
This year is also the Centenary Year of the great national upheaval
against the designs of the British Raj on the issue of partition of Bengal
in 1905. My Government salutes the contributions of Gurudev Rabindra
Nath Tagore and other leaders of the national movement who opposed
the heinous attempt of Lord Curzon to divide Bengal. We acknowledge
with gratitude the leadership and commitment of national leaders and
Gurudev Tagore in uniting people, strengthening communal harmony
and protesting against this partition, which was later on withdrawn
by the British Raj due to the massive mobilization of people.
Recently, the country celebrated the 150th anniversary of India-
Post. In a fitting tribute to India-Post, the Government recently took
initiatives to market the 4Dot.in' domain. I hope Honourable Members
who have their own websites will now switch to the 'Dotin' domain!
This year marks the 125th birth anniversary of the renowned writer
Prem Chand. He not only introduced to Hindi and Urdu prose a new
genre of writing that endeared him to generations of Indians, but through
his prose, placed the plight of the ordinary Indian, the aam admi, at
the core of our concerns. I hope Prem Chand will be rediscovered in
every school by every child across the length and breadth of our vast
The year 2005 marks the 50th anniversary of the death of Albert
Einstein and the 100th anniversary of what is often called his "annus
mirabilis". That was the year when a 26-year-old patent clerk published
three of his four greatest works, including the theory of relativity.
My Government will celebrate Einstein's anniversary by paying special
attention to basic sciences in our schools and colleges, modernizing
72 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
and reforming our institutions of science and, above all, rededicating
itself to the spread of scientific temper.
I am sure Honourable Members will join me in expressing our
admiration for the energy and enthusiasm with which our young women
and men are participating in an increasing range of sports and winning
laurels for the country at home and abroad. I believe this augurs well
as we prepare to host the 2010 Commonwealth Games and stake our
claim to host the 2018 Olympics.
This Government had promised a "New Deal to Rural India''. In
my address to the nation on the eve of the Republic Day, I had outlined
a vision for rural development. The vision envisages total eradication
of poverty, excellent and affordable opportunities for education and
skill development for all citizens, health care for all and sanitation
coverage and generation of higher income levels for all Indians. In
addition, Indian agriculture, manufacturing and services sectors will
not only cater to domestic needs but also acquire leadership positions
in the global economy. My Government will promote rural development
by providing urban amenities in rural areas (PURA). Physical
connectivity, electronic connectivity and knowledge connectivity will
Rural India should be seen as a growth engine and public
investment is required in the area of rural infrastructure to unleash its
growth potential. My Government proposes to undertake a major plan
for rebuilding rural India called "Bharat Nirman". This will be a time-
bound business plan for building rural infrastructure in the areas of
irrigation, roads, housing, water supply, electrification and
telecommunication connectivity. The Government will indicate specific
targets to be achieved under each of these goals. It is the Government's
firm resolve to make rural India realize its inherent potential. Bharat
Ninnan would be the platform on which my Government will construct
its 'New Deal for Rural India'. The details of this programme will be
outlined by the Union Finance Minister in his Budget Speech.
You have the heavy burden of legislative work pending before
you. This session will discuss the Union Budget and other Legislative
business. There are several important bills at various stages of
deliberation awaiting your consideration. The people of India anxiously
await your views and your decisions on these crucial economic and
social legislations. I urge you, Honourable Members, to repay the
trust and confidence that the people have reposed in you by dedicating
yourselves to the orderly consideration of these Bills. Every minute
of Parliament's time is precious and every citizen and taxpayer values
it greatly. I sincerely hope you will make the most effective use of
the time at your disposal and meet the citizens' expectations and fulfil
I wish you all success in your deliberations.
WT ^ m ^371 ^ cf^PT,
'TOT ^ To WFT '^TRI
Innovation - An Engine of
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the Indian Innovation Awards
2005 organized by the Entrepreneurial Management Processes
International (EMPI) in collaboration with NDTV and Business World.
I greet the organizers who are celebrating Indian Innovative
Organisations towards promotion of a culture of innovation among
our entrepreneurs. I congratulate the award winners, Infrastructural
Leasing and Financial Services, Narayana Hirudayalaya, BAIF
Development Research Foundation, Mother Dairy Food Processing
Ltd., All India Society for Electronics and Computer Technology,
National Stock Exchange of India and the Department of School
Education, Government of Nagaland. I understand that these seven
innovative organisations have been selected through a process of
selection from 569 participants. I was thinking, what to discuss with
the teams assembled here. I have chosen the topic, "Development
challenges in reaching difficult regions of the Nation". To begin with
let us discuss the engine of knowledge society which is innovation.
During the last century, the world has undergone a change from
agriculture society, where manual labour was the critical factor, to
industrial society where the management of technology, capital and
labour provided the competitive advantage. Then the information era
was born in the last decade, where connectivity and software products
are driving the economy of a few nations. In the 21st century, a new
society is emerging where knowledge is the primary production resource
instead of capital and labour. The knowledge society is powered by
innovative capacity. Efficient utilisation of this existing knowledge
can create comprehensive wealth of the nation and also improve the
Speech while presenting the Indian Innovation Awards 2005, New Delhi,
quality of life - in the form of better health, education, infrastructure
and other social indicators. Ability to create and maintain the knowledge
infrastructure, develop knowledge workers and enhance their
productivity through creation, growth and use of new knowledge will
be the key factors in deciding the prosperity of this Knowledge Society.
Whether a nation has arrived at a stage of knowledge society is judged
by the way the country effectively deals with knowledge creation
and knowledge deployment in all sectors like IT, Industries, Agriculture,
Health Care etc. Innovation is the key element in building the knowledge
society. Knowledge society in turn leads to developed societies. I am
very happy that with institutions that deal with entrepreneurship,
electronic media and print media in business are joining together,
taking the innovation as an important task.
Now I would like to discuss the ingredients of Knowledge Society.
Knowledge is converted into wealth for social good through the
process of innovation. Innovation is an important factor for the
competitiveness of both service and manufacturing sectors. Innovation
is mainly fed by dynamic organizational change and also in various
walks of life borne out of experiences of individuals and groups and
at times from R&D labs also. Hence there is an urgent need to establish
an efficient innovation system in the country. Such a system would
involve creation of clusters, which are networks of:
(b) Technology and knowledge producing institutions like
universities, colleges and institutes, research institutes, and
(c) Bridging institutions like think tanks, providers of technical
or consultancy services, and
(d) Customers linking the value-added production chain.
The concept of clusters goes beyond that of a firm network, as it
captures all forms of knowledge sharing and exchange. Thus, an
innovative system with its clusters would tap into the growing stock
of global knowledge, assimilate and adopt it to local needs and finally
76 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
create new knowledge and technology. The innovators who have been
awarded can replicate their innovations in different parts of the country.
Time is now ripe especially since the Government is focused to provide
a new deal for the rural India.
In my address to the nation on the eve of the Republic Day 2005,
I had outlined a vision for rural development. The vision envisages
total eradication of poverty, excellent and affordable opportunities
for education and skill development for all citizens, health care for
all and sanitation coverage and generation of higher income levels
for all the people in the country. In addition, agriculture, manufacturing
and services sectors will not only cater to domestic needs but also
acquire leadership positions in the global economy. In the Finance
Minister's latest budget proposals the programme of Providing Urban
Facilities in Rural Areas (PURA) plays a very important role. PURA
envisages four connectivities. They are physical connectivity, electronic
connectivity and knowledge connectivity thereby achieving economic
With the kind of awareness and opportunities available in ICT,
it will soon become a reality wherein every one of our villages will
have computers and connectivity available. These would be the window
to the world of knowledge for our villages and also to reap the benefits
of our e-governance, tele-education, tele-medicine, e-commerce and
e-judiciary initiatives. In spite of the all-pervasive nature of the
computers they would still be far away from being a truly friendly
access device for our villagers. We would need in such cases, a human
intermediary who would act as the village information officer. He
will be the extended eyes and ears of the villager to the world of
knowledge. India has approximately 2.3 lakh Village Panchayats. I
visualize establishment of village knowledge centres in these Panchayats
to empower the villagers with the knowledge and to act as a nodal
centre for knowledge connectivity for the villagers. This Village
Knowledge Centre will act as an interface for economic activity among
the village clusters. The knowledge centre from which the villagers
would access the information through the village information officer
can also be used for collection, digital storage and dissemination of
village-specific information to the villagers. The development of
Village Knowledge Centres has become a reality in the budget proposals
There is always a tendency, even among social institutions and
social organisations including religious institutions that they would
like to select for education, health care and other socially relevant
activities, always well developed parts of states (with few exceptions),
and preferably urban areas. Particularly, the innovators should always
select difficult areas and trigger development to ensure the balanced
development of the whole nation.
Here I am reminded of an e-mail which I received from one of
our citizens. The e-mail reads as follows:
Here is a piece to remind all of us on whatever health, wealth or
light we have, and the importance of sharing it with the less privileged
or inherited ones. A few weeks ago National Institute for Mentally
Handicapped, Hyderabad, had conducted a sports meet for all the
physically and mentally handicapped children at National Stadium,
Hyderabad. In one race nine contestants, all physically or mentally
disabled, assembled at the starting line for the 100 metre race. At the
starting signal, they all started out, not exactly in a dash, but with a
relish to run the race to the finish and win. All of them ran except one
little boy who stumbled on the asphalt, tumbled over a couple of times,
and began to cry. The other eight heard the boy cry. They slowed
down and looked back. Then they all turned around and went back ...
every one of them. One girl with Down's syndrome bent down and
kissed him and said, "This will make it better." Then all nine linked
arms and walked together to the finish line. Everyone in the stadium
stood, and the cheering went on for several minutes. People who were
there are still telling the story. Why? Because deep down we know
this one thing: What matters in this life is more than winning for
ourselves. What matters in this life is helping others win, even if it
means slowing down and changing our course. I would say that, you
do not have to slow down. Rather by helping difficult areas, the feed
back will make you go faster. If you pass this on, we may be able to
change our hearts as well as someone else's. "A candle loses nothing
by lighting another candle".
78 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
This noble act will promote creativity and socially conscious
society among our billion people and they will all become partners in
Since our population is of a billion people, the society in its own
way has to make innovations continuously, not only in urban areas
but also in rural areas. For example, the honey bee network movement
at Ahmedabad is an excellent attempt towards promotion of creativity.
Creativity comes from beautiful minds. It can be anywhere and any
part of the country. It may start from a fisherman's hamlet or a farmer's
household or a dairy farm or cattle breeding centre or it emanates
from class rooms or labs or industries or R&D centres. Creativity has
got multi-dimensions like inventions, discoveries and innovations.
Creativity has got an ability to imagine or invent something new by
combining, changing or reapplying existing ideas. Creativity has an
attitude to accept change and newness, a willingness to play with
ideas and possibilities, a flexibility of outlook, the habit of enjoying
the good, while looking for ways to improve it. Creativity has a process
to work hard and continually to improve ideas and solutions by making
gradual alterations and refinements to their works. The important aspect
of creativity is: seeing the same thing as everybody else, but thinking
of something different. Now I would like to share my experiences
with National Innovation Foundation.
I have seen in Ahmedabad the working of "the National Innovation
Foundation" which is able to attract a number of innovations coming
from the rural sector. However, what they need is design input to
make it into a competitive marketable product. I would recommend a
collaborative venture between the Entrepreneurial Management
Processes International (EMPI) and National Innovation Foundation
to work on converting the promising innovations into a commercially
viable venture. This can lead to creation of a number of enterprises in
the rural sector leading to large scale employment and wealth generation
in the rural areas. The establishment of enterprises for such ventures
can be financially supported by the institutions like IL & FS.
Now I would like to suggest a method by which EMPI and other
partners can make productive use of the valuable data generated through
the conduct of Indian Innovation Award Scheme.
The Entrepreneurial Management Processes International has
received 569 applications on different areas relevant to the development
of our society such as: public policy, physical infrastructure, social
infrastructure, rural development, high technology and manufacturing
industries, new convergent media, service industries - banking,
insurance, hospitals, agriculture, food, water management and
environment. EMPI can create a forum in which the proposals submitted
for the award can be discussed facilitating its dissemination to intended
users and also create market connectivity for wider applications. The
faculty members of EMPI could select the top three innovations in
each of the areas and prepare them as case studies for the students of
EMPI. The television partner NDTV and print partner Business World
can make these innovations as episodes and disseminate to different
institutions through their channel. This will be an effective method
of promoting these innovations towards societal applications. Can
you take up this challenge?
For the nation today what is needed is a combination of technology,
innovation, leadership and inspired workforce. Let us analyze the
dynamics of good organizations for national development. Developed
India as defined can be only powered by economic strength.
The economic strength is powered by competitiveness.
The competitiveness is powered by knowledge power.
The knowledge power is powered by technology and
- The technology is powered by resource investment.
The resource investment is powered by revenue and return
- The revenue is powered by volume and repeat sales through
- The customer loyalty is powered by quality and value of
80 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Quality and value of products is powered by employee
The employee productivity is powered by employee loyalty,
employee satisfaction and working environment.
The working environment is powered by management
Management stewardship is powered by invisible leadership.
The invisible leadership means exercising the vision to change
the traditional role from the commander to the coach, manager to
mentor, from director to delegator and from one who demands respect
to one who facilitates self-respect. I am sure all the institutions and
the future aspiring institutions are spearheaded by invisible leadership.
For a prosperous and developed India, the important thrust will be on
the growth in the number of invisible leaders and innovative
organisations. Once again let me congratulate all the award winners
and wish you all success in promoting innovative organisations.
Discovering India - Dynamics of Travel
J AM HAPPY to participate in the inauguration of the Fifth Global
Travel and Tourism Summit organized by the World Travel and
Tourism Council (WTTC) in partnership with the Ministry of Tourism.
I am delighted to deliver the inaugural address. My greetings to the
organizers, government functionaries, delegates from member countries,
tourist operators, infrastructure developers, other participants and
distinguished guests. I would like to discuss on the topic "Dynamics
of Travel and Tourism".
The spirit of 'Discovering India" is indeed motivated by many
kingdoms in the past. That is how Chinese traveller Hiuen Tsang
during 630-645 AD visited India and saw the glory of Nalanda
University teaching at that time and stayed there for doing research
in theology, philosophy and religion. The traveller was first a student
and later became a teacher. His 12 years' travel in India has been
highlighted in the book form giving the political, social and education
system of the country at that time. In 1017 AD another important
traveller from Persia, Alberuni, travelled many parts of India and
recorded many aspects of Indian civilization with his analyses and
comments. As you all know, the mission of Columbus for "discovering
India" in year 1492 ended in discovering another continent, America.
Something happened and an American tourist, Thomas L. Friedman,
after 512 years of the voyage of Columbus, flies to India and finds in
the Information Technology capital Bangalore the 'crown jewel' of
Indian outsourcing and software industry. It can be seen that discovering
India is a continuous process even in 21st century. That is how all of
you from many parts of the planet have assembled in this hall of
Address at the Inauguration of the 5th Global Travel and Tourism Summit, New Delhi,
82 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Ashoka Hotel today. My greetings to all of you for this successful
mission of discovering India.
The present day tourism, if we take in India with the billion people,
with the vast civilizational heritage of the country, from the Himalayas
to Kanyakumari, J&K, Central India, North-Eastern states, Bihar,
Western States, the large coastal line, Andaman & Nicobar and
Lakshadweep Islands have a lot to attract the tourists. It has sea coast
on three sides, it has islands, it has snow-covered hill region, it has
desert and it has thick forest regions. All of them are of natural evolution.
Many centuries-old monuments, temples, churches and mosques are
spread throughout the country. You will find in many parts of the
country all three situated adjacent to each other. It is a treat to watch
such type of unity. India has one of the Seven Wonders of the World,
Taj Mahal. Any tourist can see the continuity of the only enriched
civilization of billion people of the largest democracy with multiple
religions, multiple languages and multiple cultures.
India, like many other countries, has had a long tradition of religious
and spiritual tourism. Our ancestors travelled to the different corners
of the subcontinent, sometimes on foot, to visit places of pilgrimage.
While the main objective of the pilgrim was to attain communion
with the nature, the route always had an element of adventure and of
the unexpected. The journey also brought the traveller face to face
with the marvels provided by Mother Nature whether in the form of
the Himalayas, the deep jungles or the deep blue of the Indian Ocean.
This, to my mind, was an ideal tourist package - low in cost but high
on experience and adventure - in effect, it gives shape to the tourist's
dream. Today there are many types of tourism in vogue. Some of the
prominent tourist products are spiritual tourism, ecological tourism,
religious tourism, health tourism, festival tourism and cultural tourism.
Also the nation attracts researchers, students and teachers to study
India's pattern of living and the economic and cultural integrity of
the last half a century after independence.
Last year when I was in Dubai, I met the Ruler of Dubai. He said
that Dubai was planning to increase the tourist arrival by five times.
Once this decision was taken, I found, that the aviation minister was
planning for a new airport and also new types of aircraft needed for
attracting the tourists. The surface transport minister was planning a
number of additional road lanes required on the highways. The works
ministry was planning for increase in the hotel accommodation for
accommodating the tourists without disappointment. The health ministry
had a road map for waste management and a plan for providing the
additional clean water needed. This was the type of integrated response
that I found in the whole government to fulfil the national objective.
We have to take the message coming out of this experience and plan
for the multiple requirements simultaneously for promoting tourism
in our country. Last week the President of Maldives was visiting India
and I had a discussion with him particularly on Maldives tourism.
The tourism in Maldives accounts for over 19% of their GDP, a fifth
of total employment, approximately 30% of revenues and 70% of
foreign exchange earnings. Tourism, the dominant sector of the country's
economy, is very dependent on choices made by external consumers.
The Maldives attracts tourists with its beautiful island resorts in the
form of aesthetically crafted thatched cottages and bungalows.
In 2004, Maldives had attracted tourists, twice its population.
On analysis, I found the reasons for the growth as, that the Government
of Maldives gives the islands for development as tourist spots on
lease to private enterprises. The private enterprises invest and develop
the whole island with self-contained resorts including roads, power
system, communication, drainage and waste management system, water,
shopping malls, entertainment areas and banking system. There is no
Government investment needed for the project.
The Indian Tourism Organisation can study this model and evolve
island tourism in Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar. In
Lakshadweep, we can also provide hinterland tourist package due to
its nearness to Kerala. This will be an additional promotional proposition
for our tourism industry. The successful tourism needs quality
infrastructure. As in the case of Maldives, there is a need to find
special methods by which the tourist infrastructure can be created
and maintained at an optimal level of performance. Now I would like
to discuss the infrastructural needs of our tourism sector.
84 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
When the tourists come to any country, they would like to realize
maximum value for the duration of their stay which can come only
through reliable and fast travel conditions. Many of our tourist spots
need travel by many modes. To enable fast travel what we need is
frequent air connectivity to majority of the tourist centres apart from
what we have for connecting small and big cities. Complementary to
the air travel we can also plan fast train services like Shatabdi Express.
Creation of these facilities will involve infrastructural development
such as airports, railway line and multi-lane roads to interior India.
The physical connectivity, electronic connectivity and knowledge
connectivity of the tourist spots can be linked with the PURA (Providing
Urban Amenities in Rural Areas) programme of the cluster of villages
in those regions. This will provide the economic connectivity through
tourist arrivals. In addition to this, we can also think in terms of inland
waterways which can attract certain class of people. This mission has
to be accomplished through government-private partnership.
Another important infrastructural need is quality clean
accommodation. Private/public sector participation should plan adequate
number of hotel rooms with various amenities at different tourist centres.
The accommodation apart from being central in location should also
provide a good environment to attract the tourists. Communication
facilities in the accommodation should be such that the guest should
feel that he is in touch with the outside world. This helps him to send
messages to any part of the world at any time. Recently, during my
visit to South Africa, I found that each room had an e-connectivity
through which the hotel was in touch with the guests. The guests can
also send messages to any part of the world. Also the hotel must be
able to provide all the information needed by the guest to plan his
visits within his prescribed budget and also available time. In addition,
the hotel authorities must ensure safety and security of the guests
including their belongings. It is also essential to provide the type of
food which the tourists normally prefer in their country including the
variety which is special in the area of their visit.
To understand the core competence of the country, a unique
schooling with scholars who knew, who have studied, who have done
the research on all our tourists assets, should be assembled and they
should teach various categories of tourist managers, workers and grass
root level tourist operators. Above all an encyclopedia of Indian tourism
should get evolved within the next three years time. This should become
the training manual for the tourism personnel and also enable the
provision of tourist guide to the visitors. This should provide adequate
knowledge to the people, regarding places, their cultural heritage,
religious importance and the bio-diversity of the whole nation. The
document should enable the visitors to make an appropriate choice
based on their interest.
There is a vast imbalance across countries in the number of tourists
which they receive. There are some countries, like Maldives, which
receive more tourists in a year than their total population. At the other
end of this spectrum are countries which hardly have any tourists
who come for visiting. Some attention must be given to identify the
reasons for the poor performance of this sector in such countries. At
the same time, it should be ensured that the natural potential and
heritage should not be over used. The case of mountain trails in the
Himalayas comes to my mind. Some years ago, it was seen that the
incoming trekkers would bring in large amounts of disposable packages
and litter the pristine environment of the Himalayas. Strong efforts
were made by many socially-oriented groups and organizations to
help clean up these hills. It has to become a big movement in the
Here I would like to mention about the experience in Sikkim,
which can be followed by other states. The State Government is
determined to make Sikkim a premier eco-tourism destination.
Numerous initiatives have been taken to preserve the natural beauty
and biodiversity of the State. The State has been declared plastic-
free five years ago by way of legislation. A portion of Gangtok town
has been declared clean zone. The urban waste disposal system in
Gangtok over the last two years is going on very smoothly with full
co-operation from the residents using scientific disposal methods.
Now I would like to talk about regional tourism.
The unique feature of the World Travel and Tourism Council is
that it can pay focused attention to the question of regional tourism
86 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
as opposed to a country-oriented tourism. We have the unique example
of the European Union where tourists can move across international
borders without any barriers. This encourages a surge in the flow of
tourists who do not have to bother with formalities while crossing
from one country to another. This is an example which the World
Council can try and convince the countries to emulate in various regions
across the world. For example, in our immediate neighbourhood we
could think of regional tourist circuits to cover the SAARC region
and the ASEAN region. Countries with common heritages and historical
civilizations could become natural partners in such regional groupings
across the world. Hassle-free travel across such regions would give
an immense boost to tourism especially in those countries. Of course
national security needs have to be complied with.
I would like to make the following suggestions for implementation
in respect of Indian tourism industry which may be true for many
1. In spite of all the variety of tourist destinations available
the present tourist arrival in India is 3.7 million. We should
work out a strategy through which we can increase this arrival
to at least 15 million within the next five years and 25 million
within the next ten years in partnership with World Travel
2. Tourism is a mission and needs the working together of
multiple ministries and industries, sometimes even nations.
The tourism leaders and managers have to be innovative to
provide time-bound tourist flow and tourist infrastructure
3. It is essential to derive the successful tourism practices and
experiences, followed in different regions of the world, from
the conference participants and put them into action in Indian
4. Evolution of a special method by which the Indian spiritual,
religious, health and eco-tourism (sea, hill, desert, and island)
can be promoted as an individual or an integrated package
based on the interest of the tourists. Personalised tourist
packages have to be evolved and continuously upgraded.
5. I suggest the design of an inter-ministerial co-ordination
system, which will be needed for the development of
infrastructure in terms of hotels, road connectivity, air
connectivity, communication system, IT-enabled services,
health care and human resource development. It is essential
to Build, Own and Operate tourism as a public-private
6. Tourism has multiple dimensions. They have to be taught
in schools and colleges. Tourism syllabus has to be designed
7. It is also important to promote multi-national tourism in
specific areas with SAARC and ASEAN countries. Promotion
of multinational spiritual tourism connecting important
Buddhist centres in India, Nepal and Thailand operated by
a single airline can also be considered.
My best wishes to the participants of the Fifth Global Travel
and Tourism Summit for useful discussions in creating awareness
among various participating agencies about the full potential of the
tourism industry so that it can become an instrument of promoting
international peace and understanding apart form providing
entertainment, learning and wealth generation and relaxation to the
Employment Generation for Rural
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in the Inauguration of the
National Summit of Rural NGOs of India being organized by the
Council for the Advancement of Peoples' Action and Rural Technology
(CAPART) of the Ministry of Rural Development. I am happy to
deliver the inaugural address. I extend my greetings to the members
of the rural NGOs, members of the Confederation of the NGOs of
Rural India, the functionaries of the Ministry of Rural Development
and distinguished guests. Integrating the work of the large number
of NGOs spread in different parts of the country is definitely an important
event. This action will have to lead to the integrated development of
our village clusters based on the core-competence of the region through
the catalytic influence of the participating NGOs. I would like to
talk to this gathering on the topic "Employment Generation is the
Foundation for Rural Development".
As you are all aware, nearly 700 million people of India live in
the rural areas in 600,000 villages comprising 200,000 Panchayats.
Connectivity of village complexes providing economic opportunities
to all segments of people is an urgent need to bridge the rural-urban
divide, generate employment and enhance rural prosperity. Repeating
what we are doing for several decades with more of the same, may
not be the way to proceed further. We need innovation and transparent
performance in our action.
We had certain acres of unutilized land in the Rashtrapati Bhavan.
We were discussing how to use this land. Through a brain storming
session, we found that we had two options, either we could use it as
an extended flower garden or make it people-centric through the other
Address at the inauguration of the National Summit of Rural NGOs of India, New
Delhi, 25 April 2005
beneficial plantations. Since Rashtrapati Bhavan is the first home of
the country, we thought, it will be more appropriate to use the land
for certain societal missions.
We created two herbal farms. One farm was used for assisting
the farmers on how to add value to their products by selecting good
quality herbs, how to extract, how to store and how to market the
product. This will be done in partnership with National R & D
Laboratories. Second one, we created for use by the visually challenged
people, where they could feel the plant, smell the plant and learn
about various plants through the Braille boards.
Simultaneously, we created a spiritual garden. Here we planted
very important plants which are valued by people of various religions.
This will create Unity of Minds among people of different faiths since
all the plantations were in a cluster. In the third area, a nutritional
garden has been created where the vegetables and fruits are grown
using organic cultivation. In the fourth area we cultivated Jatropha
curcus, the bio-fuel plant; so that farmers can learn about the Jatropha
cultivation and the conversion of Jatropha into bio-fuel which can
substantially increase the earning capacity of the farmers. After nine
months to a year, Rashtrapati Bhavan is able to offer something to
the farmers, something to the visually challenged people, something
to the students, something to the people of different religious faiths
and spiritual personalities apart from the lovers of beautiful flowers.
Rashtrapati Bhavan was receiving nearly two lakh visitors a year
in the earlier years. Now Rashtrapati Bhavan receives over one million
people in a year with varied interests. Some of them are interested in
seeing the beauty of the garden, some farmers would like to learn
about important herbal cultivation and Jatropha plantations, some life
science students would like to know more about plants and plant
characteristics, religious personalities would like to see the spiritual
garden and the visually challenged people would like to have first
hand feel of the herbal garden. The increase of citizens' visit by five
times occurred due to the citizen-centric nature of the Rashtrapati
90 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
What one should be remembered for?
I generally assume that most of the NGOs have a purpose in life
and would like to contribute to the welfare of the society. The motto
of the NGO can be "what I should be remembered for."
One study on the contribution of NGO reveals that the certain
amount of funds from foreign contributors and grants-in-aid from
various departments are being deployed on a yearly basis. However
the impact of this investment is not reaching the grass root level in
the villages to the expected degree. The study indicates that large
contributions of societal work of NGOs are visible in certain southern
States and Maharashtra. I would request the NGOs and rural
development agencies such as CAP ART to assist Bihar, UP and North
Eastern States and show their societal spirit, their entrepreneurial spirit,
mission oriented approach and assist in rural transformation. Life has
offered us an excellent opportunity. There is no great challenge in
treading the well laid-out path. Rural NGOs have to create a new
path. What are the new paths?
Let us imagine that it has rained for over two hours in a village
area. During the rain we observe many streams. Whether the water in
the streams reaches the local lake and ponds and is stored for the
villagers to use in the subsequent period, or it goes to the sea or gets
dried up on the way, is dependent on the contour which has been
made in the village and the obstruction-less path created by the Village
Panchayat for the flow of water. In some places, the roads are kept at
a higher level so that the captured water on the road directly flows
into the nearby water bodies. This I have seen in the Mount Abu area.
I had the opportunity to see the progress of works being done by the
NGOs in different places. In many places the flow of benefits of the
scheme comes to a grinding halt as soon as the NGOs or the Government
functionaries leave the scene. Hence we have to ensure that a sustainable
mechanism has to be created for continuous functioning of the scheme,
even if the NGO or government agency leaves the place. How? This
should be done by training the local people, so that they can manage
the scheme and make the benefits flow to the villagers. Rural
Development Ministry must make the Panchayats and the District
Authorities accountable for the sustainable functioning of the scheme.
Normally, the lack of maintenance leads to non-operation of many
good development works. These maintenance areas can be given to
the ex-servicemen after certain amount of training, since members of
this disciplined force are spread in all parts of the country. It is very
essential in all our development work.
PUR A (Providing Urban amenities in Rural Areas) envisages
that the employment generation is the foundation for sustainable Rural
Development. The integrated methods which will bring prosperity to
rural India are: the physical connectivity of the village clusters through
quality roads and transport; electronic connectivity through tele
communication with high bandwidth fibre optic cables reaching the
rural areas from urban cities and through internet kiosks; knowledge
connectivity through education, skill training for farmers, artisans
and craftsmen and entrepreneurship programmes. These three
connectivities will lead to economic connectivity through starting of
enterprises with the help of banks, micro credits and marketing of the
No development work is sustainable or complete unless
employment potential is created. Some of the productive employment
generation schemes are bio-fuel production, waste land development,
water harvesting, bamboo mission, converting fly ash into wealth,
cotton cultivation to garment manufacture, health care and village
knowledge centre. The details of these schemes I have discussed in
my Republic Day address to the nation. Whatever benefits are created
in education, health care or other welfare schemes, they are scantily
utilized, unless the rural people have a potential to earn.
In the budget estimates for the year 2005-06 certain provisions
have been made for generation of PURAs with a scope of integrated
village development. The integrated method envisages a mission mode
empowered management structure with executive powers at the local
implementation levels and by reducing the transactional costs through
simplification of procedures of governance.
Cost of creating such clusters depending upon the region and
population will vary and will be between Rs.50-100 crores per cluster.
92 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
After initial short-term employment during construction etc., we have
to plan for initiating actions for providing regular employment
opportunities for 5,000 people of a village cluster with a
population of 25,000. This has to be done by creating new
market-driven enterprises based on the employment generation
avenues which I have mentioned to you earlier by promoting
entrepreneurship in the rural areas and equipping people with skills
for their own self-employment for meeting the needs of economy
Now I would like to discuss how to empower the villages governed
by Panchayats with reference to some of the successful rural
development models on the lines of PURA.
Knowledge radiates from women. Periyar PURA has a ring road
and interconnecting roads covering major villages along with bus
transport system. They have provided Internet kiosks through wireless
connectivity for many of the villages. Periyar Maniammai hospitals
and family welfare centres along with the mobile cancer diagnostic
clinic provides health care to the population of the rural complex.
Campus provides education from Kindergarten to postgraduation. In
addition, they are providing knowledge connectivity through awareness
and training programmes for use of organic manure (vermi compost),
Yoga and Siddha-based formulations, renewable energy, rainwater
harvesting and general health. Women are empowered through Self-
Help Groups, entrepreneurship development programmes including
training programmes for skill development and micro business activities.
Organizers of Periyar PURA have established so far 525 self-reliant
Self Help Groups, which provide employment for 8000 rural women
through products for which technologies have been transferred apart
from other employment generation from support services. They are
self-sufficient in energy through solar power and biomass gasifier
plants. Towards economic development they have integrated farms,
energy plantation, aquaculture, livestock farms and dry land horticulture.
They have innovative water management schemes for irrigation.
Provision of training to the village community in printing technologies,
refrigeration & air conditioning, hardware training, Desk Top Publishing
(DTP), plumbing, electrical wiring, welding/fabrication, bakery and
construction technology has created job opportunities to the villagers.
The members of the villages are fruitfully employed and they are
producing value added products. A transformation has taken place
keeping our civilizational heritage intact and converted the rural settings
into a livable habitat. I have witnessed the progress of this project.
The message I would like to convey through this model is how
an engineering college for women with a vision can transform sixty
five villages with a population of three lakhs. They have the passion
to transform the lives of the village around them as they thought
differently and acted differently. That is how they enriched the society
all around. Let me narrate another example from south Gujarat.
I would like to share with you an integrated village cluster
development programme which I witnessed during my visit with Dr.
Narayan G Hegde, an IIM graduate who is an expert in farming and
dairying to two village clusters of south Gujarat - Chonda and Lachakadi,
with a population of 5000. In these villages every summer the tribal
people migrate to nearby towns. The BAIF model was installed in
these two villages with peoples' co-operation and the participation
of state authorities. Firstly water harvesting was undertaken to get
water for every individual. Every home was provided with livestock
and also a market for milk. Simultaneously, fruit orchards were
established with various fruit crops such as cashew and mangoes,
which are tolerant to drought. When I visited these villages, there
was a connecting road and water ponds. The tribal population, with
radiant smiles on their faces, was harvesting crops, packaging and
carrying milk to different supply points. I happened to see the economic
growth and prosperity of the tribal people, which has been facilitated
by BAIF with people's participation. I understand that this model -
Vadi (Orchard) has now been replicated in many places by the state
governments of Maharashtra, Gujarat and Rajasthan.
The project was implemented through Self Help Groups (SHGs)
by building mutual confidence. The groups took the responsibility to
help the weaker members. This boosted progress. The results were
phenomenal. In Ghatol cluster in Udaipur out of 3000 poor families,
94 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
more than 90% were able to earn Rs.20,000 per annum. Efficient
watershed development not only helped to ensure the availability of
safe drinking water throughout the year but also boosted their crop
yields from 30% to 80%. Over 800 hectares of Anola orchards were
established for the first time in the region, which started yielding
from the third year. The farmers' groups have started processing and
marketing the fruits. The entire village cluster was self-sufficient in
food supply. Dairy and animal husbandry further boosted their family
income from 30 to 60%. These families had formed 71 Self Help
Groups and 24 village level organizations. They have built their own
corpus of Rs.30 lakhs. Similar success was achieved in Banswada
district. In Gokulpura cluster in Bundi district in Rajasthan, watershed
based multi-disciplinary development facilitated the local farmers to
grow two crops during the year while the entire district was receiving
food aid under the drought relief. This happened in a region where
the average annual rainfall is less than 700 mm and the region was
facing chronic drought successively for the third year.
These two examples demonstrate how the Periyar PURA and
BAIF can bring prosperity to a village or a group of villages through
concerted action to meet the needs of the village community. These
are independent examples of "PURA in action". Now I would like
to specifically elaborate on Village Knowledge Centre, which has
got potential of providing real time communication to the rural people
and the employment potential.
With the kind of awareness and opportunities available in ICT,
it will soon become a reality wherein every one of our villages will
have computers and connectivity available. These would be the window
to the world of knowledge for our villages and also to reap the benefits
of our e-governance, tele-education, tele-medicine, e-commerce and
e-judiciary initiatives. In spite of the all-pervasive nature of the
computers they would still be far away from being a truly friendly
access device for our villagers. We would need in such cases a human
intermediary who would act as the village information officer. He
will be the extended eyes and ears of the villager to the world of
knowledge. India has approximately 2.3 lakh Village Panchayats.
I visualize establishment of village knowledge centres in these
Panchayats to empower the villagers with the knowledge and to act
as a nodal centre for knowledge connectivity for the villagers. The
knowledge centre will provide to the villagers the real time information
about the market details on their products from the agriculture, cottage
industry, fisheries and other rural industries in their locality as well
as national markets. This also will provide direct quality employment
to over one million people who will be instrumental in promoting
higher level of wealth generation in our rural sector. In addition, the
Village Information Officer will become a vital link between the rural
clusters and the NGOs and the other government agencies operating
on development tasks in the clusters.
Now I would like to discuss how the members of different NGOs
can work together and make our rural area prosperous, happy, and
peaceful and a safe place to live in for the 260 million people who are
living below the poverty line.
The study of nearly 12,300 NGOs spread in different parts of
the country indicates that they are engaged in tasks such as rural housing,
rural sanitation, watershed development, irrigation and drinking water,
organic farming, agriculture products improvement etc. Also, I find
that the funding for the NGOs is coming from multiple ministries
and departments such as Health and Family Welfare, Rural
Development, Human Resource Development etc. The average total
funding from various ministries and departments during any financial
year to the NGOs works out to the order of Rs.500 crore. In addition,
NGOs receive foreign contributions to an extent of Rs.4000 crore.
I was thinking how this large network of committed institutions
could be used for rural development at a faster rate. Since the
representatives of nearly 2,500 NGOs have assembled here, I would
like to share some of the thoughts on how NGOs can be a partner
in the rural development with government agencies. Firstly, NGOs
must be ready to find new paths of development instead of
following the already repeated path. Secondly, the NGOs or the
Government agencies when they leave the scene of development; the
development initiated has to be made self-supporting and maintaining.
96 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Thirdly, there will be a tendency to take up development in relatively
developed states or closer to the urban areas. They are not real
challenges. It is more challenging to work in the States such as Bihar,
eastern UP and North-eastern States who are having the crying need
In summary, I am having 12 suggestions for the Ministry of Rural
Development and its government agencies and also their partners like
NGOs for the integrated rural development of the country.
1. Rural development through PURA mechanism will lead to
minimum cost and minimum time in execution of the rural
2. A master plan is essential for development of rural cluster
complexes. Ministry of Rural Development can work out
the number of PURAs in each of the districts in consultation
with the respective states, district administrations and local
bodies. And also they can prepare the master plan for
individual PURA. NGOs can help in initial identification
and preparation of a master plan.
3. Ministry of Rural Development can facilitate the preparation
of business plans for each of the PURAs through government,
non-government and corporate agencies.
4. Ministry of Rural Development has to arrange fast funding
methodology and time-bound action by the executive agency.
For enabling this, I would recommend institution of a two-
tier management system and identifying a Programme
Director. At the apex level an empowered Rural Development
Board with participation by all executive agencies has to
be created with delegated administrative and financial powers
to the Programme Directors. At the next level there can be
a project management board with representatives drawn from
Panchayats, district agencies, NGOs and other supporting
5. A management plan has to be evolved and approved by the
management boards (Stated in Para 4).
6. The government grants required for development work to
be executed by NGOs may be approved on the
recommendations of the empowered boards by the respective
ministries to avoid duplication and to ensure integrated
development of PURA complexes.
7. Empowered boards should encourage NGOs to execute the
task in the village cluster through the local talents to the
maximum extent possible so that the development tasks
become the income as well as employment generation avenue
for the rural people till rural enterprises become operational.
8. It is essential to prepare a database of all successful rural
development tasks achieved in the country and sustained. I
would like to name some of them. Periyar Pura, BAIF
Experience, Enhancement of seed cotton productivity in Nava
Pind village in Punjab, successful provision of internal roads
in Kuthampakkam by villagers (near Chennai) themselves
and Siruthuli in Coimbatore. Members assembled here may
have many such examples which can be consolidated. This
directory can be the guiding post.
9. Rural Development is a very important mission. The fund
allotted to various agencies like Government, NGOs etc.
have to be properly used for the mission and accounted for,
and the results should be seen by the people. A transparent
management and performance system is essential.
10. For ensuring continuity of development, the Ministry of Rural
Development should have a fixed tenure of five years for
all the functionaries of the empowered management system.
This will bring a system of accountability among the
functionaries, leading to the realization of prosperous rural
clusters in a time-bound manner. Change of government or
change of personalities should not disrupt developmental
11. I have a suggestion. The name NGO does not sound well.
They can be called as Societal Transformers or any other
name you all can consider.
98 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
12. Based on the NGOs - Rural Development Agency (CAPART)
performance and results, the total budget can be enhanced
to Rs. 10,000 crore including contribution from other
I inaugurate the National Summit of Rural NGOs of India.
I wish all of you, the Government functionaries and NGOs
success in your mission of making our rural clusters prosperous,
happy and a peaceful place for the village citizens to live in. Our
dream has to be to realize reverse migration of people from urban
area to rural area.
Providing Water to Every Citizen
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of the National
Water Convention 2005. The topic selected for the convention is
"Water for Life with special reference to Interlinking of Rivers in
India" organized by the Ministry of Water Resources. I greet the
organizers, participants and enlightened dignitaries for addressing this
major issue in this annual convention. I was thinking what I can share
with the delegates of the conference who have come to discuss the
very important issue of water management, particularly conservation,
development and management of water resources, and also our concern
for providing water for irrigation and good quality potable water for
all citizens of the country. There are also other concerns such as ecology,
questions of displacement of human habitats etc. Therefore, my address
will be on "Integrated Water Mission".
There are some who have great expectations about linking of
rivers. There are also some others who have a question whether this
programme will be a blessing for the country.
I would like to discuss four aspects with you.
1. What is the total requirement of water for our nation for
drinking purposes, sanitation, irrigation and other industrial
uses and what the nation gets through seasonal inputs (rain
and melting of snow)?
2. One third of our population is affected by flood or drought
3. Per capita availability of water varies from 10 kilo litre to
50 kilo litre for different seasons and regions.
Inaugural Address at the National Water Convention 2005, New Delhi, 11 May 2005
100 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
4. What are the optimal ways of meeting the minimum needs
of water for the entire population, assuming a particular
population growth rate for the country? We should remember
that by 2020 we have to produce approx. 400 million tones
of grain and the water requirement will also go up due to
India gets approximately 4000 billion cubic metres (BCM) of
water every year from all natural sources. Out of this 700 BCM are
lost in evaporation and another 700 are lost during the flow on ground.
Also, the large part of water namely 1500 BCM flows into the sea
due to floods. Thus, the remaining available water is only 1100 BCM.
Out of this ground water recharge accounts for 430 BCM per year
and the present utilized surface water is 370 BCM. The balance
unutilized water which can be harnessed is 300 BCM.
I was studying the frequent occurrence of flood and drought.
Flood normally affects eight major river valleys spread over 40 million
hectares of area in the entire country affecting nearly 260 million
people. Similarly the drought affects 86 million people who are spread
in 14 States covering a total of 116 districts. Wherefrom this flood
comes? It comes from the 1500 BCM of water every year flowing
during the monsoon season. If we have to prevent the damage due to
the flood and reduce the severity of drought, we have to harness this
1500 BCM of water and distribute it to the drought affected areas.
We can also partly store it in proper storage system so that it can be
available during non-monsoon months. If we succeed in doing all
these, we will not only save the loss arising out of the damage caused
to the crops, properties and people by the flood to the extent of Rs.2400
crores on an average per year, we will also save the recurring expenditure
of Rs. 1200 crores incurred by the government as short term relief
measure. The questions which arise are how to harness the flood water?
And how to regulate the outflow of flood water so that it does not go
into sea and it is converted as useful water for the mankind?
Hence our aim should be to channelise the 1500 BCM of flood
water, so that it can be made use of for providing water to drought
affected areas and make sufficient water available to the whole country
during non-monsoon months through proper linking, storage and
distribution. Our plans must consider that presently the sanitation
facilities are not available in more than 50% of the dwelling units in
the country. Planners must take into account this aspect while selecting
schemes for harnessing and distributing the water for our growing
population. We may have to align our interlinking of rivers project
for meeting the growing water demands of the nation by having a
hybrid scheme which can harness the additional 300 BCM per year
and also the flood water of 1500 BCM.
There is an urgent need to find long-term solution to control
flood, store and utilize the surplus water during drought. In the Gangetic
region, I would recommend construction of layered wells in the entry
points of Kosi river. Normally the flood water has certain dynamic
flow conditions. The layered wells assist gradual reduction in dynamic
flow velocity after filling each storage well. The water thus stored
will be useful during shortage period. Similar solution can be found
for the north-eastern region. I recommend this scheme can be included
in the Interlinking of rivers programme.
Also the scheme chosen must be such that there is continuous
availability of additional water for the growing population and the
related needs of the nation by regulating the outflow into the sea.
Now I would like to discuss about the possible issues arising out
of this mission. The main issues which concern certain number of
people are rehabilitation and environmental upgradation.
While working on such large schemes, certain amount of
displacement of people is bound to happen. We should aim at minimizing
dislocations. We also have to consider the overall impact and benefits
of the scheme which in this case is going to benefit nearly 340 million
people who are affected constantly by floods or droughts. Rehabilitation
Plan should include working out areas required for providing housing
for the affected families which have to be relocated, space required
for the livelihood either agricultural, artisanal or industrial. Adequate
funds required should become the component of the mission of
"Connecting Water Resources". Also, by learning from the problems
102 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
of the past, necessary new mechanisms have to be put in place to
provide facilities to those who are likely to be displaced well in advance.
Governance issues connected with these projects are equally important,
as technologies, project management, finances etc. The project report
should consist of all these components before seeking sanction.
There are certain apprehensions by environmentalists that the
large-scale diversion of water and disturbance to the terrain may
endanger or affect geological and ecological balance. It is therefore
essential to find solution to their concern and build it as a part of the
mission of interlinking of rivers. For example, the afforestation area
could be increased by 10 to 15 per cent from the present forest area
and also designing the river flow management. Therefore the
comprehensive mission planned by the government will have to take
into account pooled allocations from the various departments and closely
monitored, as it will have impact in every field of development
programmes of many ministries of state and central governments.
Science and technology can surely help in executing such missions.
India has its own remote sensing satellites and their applications will
help in large-scale survey from the source and river flow pattern at
various seasons. Optimum water routes and mapping of the
environmental profile can be evolved using virtual reality through
satellite and aerial imageries. The most important means is to use
CARTOSAT-I for getting stereo type pictures on water resources and
drought. This should become part of the Water Mission.
During my address to the Andhra Pradesh assembly, it was
suggested that the Godavari water which flows into the sea to the
extent of2500 tmc during floods and 750 tmc during normal conditions
may be diverted into the basin area for irrigation purposes through
step dams, irrigation canals and water storage lakes and ponds. This
will increase the irrigated area of the Godavari basin by over 30%.
Andhra Pradesh government has agreed to implement this scheme.
Also I was informed by the Chief Minister of Goa that the Government
of Goa has interlinked Zuari river with Kalay river in Mandovi basin
through installation of pumps and gravity flow. This has been done
to ensure availability of drinking water in this region. Every State
should be asked to inter-connect their own rivers on the lines of Goa.
This should form part of the State Planning. Overall planning of
interlinking of rivers has to integrate the state water resource
Simultaneously we have to undertake missions for water
harvesting, recycling and environmental upgradation, for long-term
availability of 800 BCM surface and ground water. I would like to
give some examples which have been implemented in different regions
Water harvesting and water recycling should become mandatory
for all the states. To improve water table we need to build check
dams; develop water sheds, desilt ponds and rivers, clear the inlets
and outlets to the ponds and water bodies and recharge the wells. If
our rural areas are made to have the operational clean water bodies,
recharging of the wells will take place. These activities will also generate
employment. Tamil Nadu government has taken the lead and made
water harvesting a mandatory requirement for all house holders in
the state including rural areas . Studies indicate that this has resulted
in considerable improvement in ground water level in this season.
Recently the permanent housing scheme for tsunami affected people
includes water harvesting in all houses. Some states have taken action
to revive lakhs of water bodies of different types. They have also
undertaken mini and micro water shed irrigation schemes to improve
ground water level in drought prone areas to preserve the local rain
In addition to water harvesting, water recycling is essential for
large consumers such as hotels, public institutions and industries.
The recycled water must be used for all purposes including agricultural
needs, except for drinking. This will reduce the per capita requirement
of water to nearly 25% of the present consumption and enable larger
number of population to get adequate potable water and for sanitation.
The status of environmental cleanliness is one of the indicators
of development of a nation. As a nation, we have to keep our environment
clean and tidy including all our places of worship and rivers. I am
delighted to learn the Kali Bein rivulet, the place where Gurunanak
104 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Devji is said to have received enlightenment. Over the years this rivulet
had turned into a weed-choked drain. The river is now clean due to
the efforts of Baba Balbir Singh Seechewal in partnership with the
Punjab State Government. From the discussions, I understand that he
organized people's participation in stopping the massive flow of sewage
into the Bein and cleaned 160 km long polluted and choked rivulet
within the last three and a half years by deploying on an average
3000 volunteer pilgrims per day. Today one can feel the flow of fresh
water in this rivulet released from the Tarkina Barrage by the government
about a year ago. The revival of the rivulet has recharged the water
table as the hand pumps that had become dry for the past four decades
are now pumping out water.
While I was thinking how we should solve the problem of
improving the environment of rivers and religious places, I find one
of our enlightened citizens has taken the initiative and demonstrated
the power of ignited individuals to solve a societal problem. Let this
model spread in all the places of divine worship and inspire the pilgrims
to participate in the task of clean environment in water and air.
"Thousands of local initiatives will make India green."
This is an initiative started by Coimbatoreans for Coimbatoreans.
This ecological project aims to bring back the glory of Coimbatore
and its rich heritage. The project is represented by people from all
walks of life and professionally organized. The primary focus is on
large scale rain water harvesting, afforestation, sewage/waste water
treatment and solid waste management. They have already standardized
five of the nine primary tanks in Coimbatore for large scale rainwater
harvesting. Over 600 saplings have been planted on the bunds of the
de-silted tanks and are being maintained. They are moving towards a
target of planting 15 lakh trees by the end of 2005. The comprehensive
study has indicated outlet of the city sewage as 10 million litres per
day. A pilot plant is being taken up for sewage treatment to treat one
million litres per day. The treated water will be sold to the agriculturists
and industrialists as a revenue earning measure. The garbage and debris
to the extent of over 26,000 cubic metres in one of the city's largest
tanks have been removed. This model can be replicated throughout
Recently I had visited Periyar Maniammai College of Technology
for women and inaugurated a project called PURA (Providing Urban
amenities in Rural Areas) Complex. Over 65 villages near Vallam,
Thanjavur district of Tamil Nadu, have been transformed as a PURA
Cluster. It has a ring road and interconnecting roads covering major
villages along with bus transport system.
They have innovative water management schemes for irrigation
and providing potable water for all the village citizens. All 65 Periyar
PURA villages are having only rain-fed irrigation. Due to shortage
of rainfall in that locality, farmers were suffering due to scarcity of
water not only for agriculture but also for drinking purposes. Keeping
this in mind, Periyar PURA developed six percolation ponds and five
check dams to harness the rain water amounting to 2.73 lakh cubic
metre per year. This water is supporting the irrigation of 300 acres of
land through recharging their open wells and bore wells. It also supplies
drinking water to the people. Periyar PURA has also developed alternate
practices such as contour lands, check dams across natural streams
for water conservation and developed a model for irrigation for
conservation of water. More than 5000 farmers are benefiting from
this programme. This example will be useful for water management
Our planet will encounter in the next few decades severe shortage
of water if we are not careful in conserving and preserving precious
water resources. In India, we should have action-oriented plans to
foresee the problem and work on a mission mode before the water
situation worsens. It is essential that we must have a water management
mission that unfurls our vision for the next two decades, integrating
interlinking of rivers, water harvesting, water re-cycling, and
desalination of sea water using solar energy in specific areas.
I would suggest the following seven action points for this
(a) Recommending schemes which will ensure availability of
minimum 25 kilo litres of water per year for each citizen in
106 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
(b) The schemes chosen should also ensure the availability of
water required for producing four hundred million tonnes
of foodgrains per year by 2020. Simultaneously, it is suggested
that the agricultural scientists need to develop crop varieties,
similar to ICRISAT seeds, which will need minimum water.
(c) Scheme chosen should ensure that no state is affected by
(d) Water harvesting must be made mandatory for all buildings.
Necessary legal provisions may be made in this regard.
(e) Recommend appropriate legal provisions for making
recycling of water mandatory in all buildings particularly
large hotels and industries where large amount of water is
(f) Expenditure required for rehabilitation and environmental
upgradation should become part of the mission of "connecting
water resources". Also a people-oriented governance system
should be in place to take care of affected people.
(g) There are many schemes for interlinking of rivers. Ministry
of Water Resources has to consolidate all the best aspects
and bring out a cost-effective project report. As a whole,
interlinking of rivers has to be a mission mode project.
I wish the 11th National Water Convention success in your mission
of providing water for life to every citizen of the country.
ONGC - Fuelling the Economy
T AM DELIGHTED to participate in the Golden Jubilee Celebrations
of the Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. (ONGC). On this
occasion, I extend my greetings to all the members of ONGC and the
pioneers who have nurtured this institution from its inception. I
understand that over the years, ONGC has discovered and recovered
significant reserves. In addition, it produces a number of value added
products such as LPG, High Speed Diesel, Naphtha and Kerosene.
Today, I would like to discuss on the topic "Vision for ONGC".
ONGC is indeed an important organisation in fuelling the economy
of the nation. I congratulate the ONGC for its achievements in oil
and gas exploration which has now led to the annual production of
27 million metric ton of oil and 25 million metric ton of gas (oil
equivalent) in 2004-05. Also ONGC has expanded its activity by
working with multinational partners in many countries for oil and
gas exploration in a competitive manner through its wholly owned
subsidiary ONGC Videsh. In addition to crude oil and natural gas,
ONGC is producing and marketing LPG, Naphtha, superior kerosene
oil and high speed diesel. Efforts of ONGC have enabled the country
to meet around 25% of its oil requirement. We must recognize that
the oil and gas derived from the fossil materials from the present
wells are fast depleting. Though we are continuously making efforts
to find new wells, the success rate is quite low. Hence, there is a need
to develop new strategies for realizing energy security followed by
energy independence for the nation.
When I am with you, 1 think of the unfortunate accident, which
took place in one of the ONGC platforms in Bombay High on a rainy
Address at the Golden Jubilee Celebration of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd.,
Dehradun, 14 August 2005
108 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
day, last month. I would like to commend the ONGC community
who bravely combated the situation. All of you worked together to
save many precious lives with courage and team work. You did not
allow the effect of the accident to percolate in different areas and
brought in near normalcy in your operation within a couple of days
and maintained the rate of production. The nation is thankful to ONGC
for managing this crisis in an excellent fashion and maintaining the
energy lifeline of the nation. Let me give a tribute to ONGC based
on my experience. I would like to recall what Prof Satish Dhawan,
the then Chairman of ISRO, had said after giving me the project "if
you do not have a mission, no problem will occur, but if you do have
a mission or task definitely problems of varying magnitudes will crop
up. But problems should not become the master of the individuals,
individuals should become the master of the problem, defeat it and
I would like to share with you an experience, which I had when
I visited Sudan in October 2003. The President of the Republic of
Sudan, H.E. Mr. Omar Hassan Ahmed Al-Bashir, his Minister for
Energy and Sudanese team met me with our ONGC Videsh team.
During this meeting the Sudanese members expressed happiness with
ONGC team partnership in their exploration and oil transportation.
They recognized the professionalism of Indian oil and gas experts.
They considered India as a preferred partner in all their future oil
exploration projects. I am happy that Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
Gas has given high priority for such projects which is essential for
meeting the energy security needs of our country. ONGC Videsh must
keep up this momentum and work with many other countries in the
With our economic growth, oil and gas requirement is
continuously increasing and is around 114 million tonnes per
annum at present, the import component of which amounts to
over rupees 120,000 crore. ONGC's production is also required to
increase to keep pace with this demand. I understand that ONGC is
embarking on deep water exploration and increasing the recovery
factor from our wealth which is around 28-29% at present. With all
your indigenous resources and international co-operation might, you
will be able to reach the target of 50 million tones within the next
decade. In such a situation, what can be the vision for ONGC for the
Vision for ONGC, I believe, has to aim at providing to the nation
at least 50% of its annual oil and gas need. Since we are dealing with
fossil material resources, it may not be possible to meet this requirement
fully from conventional oil exploration and extraction alone.
The only way it appears to me is that to meet the 50% oil needs,
you have to go to the route of renewable energy, apart from your
further exploration of deep sea oil resources and enhancement of
recovery factor. ONGC must consider that they are in the broader
business of energy and not merely oil and gas exploration. This will
enable ONGC to enter into renewable energy routes such as bio-fuel
production and development of solar energy.
We have nearly 63 million hectares of wasteland available in
the country, out of which 33 million hectares of wasteland have been
allotted for tree plantation. Jatropha can grow well in this wasteland
with very little input. Once grown the crop has fifty years of life.
Fruiting can take place in this plant in two years. It yields upto five
tonnes per hectare oil seeds and produces two tonnes of bio-diesel.
Presently, the cost of bio-diesel through the plant is approximately
Rs.17 to Rs.19 per litre which can be substantially reduced through
choice of right size of the plant and using high yield variety plantation
which has already been established by the researchers. Bio-diesel plants
grown in one million hectares of land can yield a revenue of
approximately Rs.2,000 crore a year and provide employment to over
one million people both for plantation and running of the extraction
plants. This is a sustainable development process leading to large
scale employment of rural manpower. Also, it will reduce the foreign
exchange outflow paid for importing crude oil. Use of bio-diesel is
carbon neutral. This oil can also be used for soap and candle industries.
De-oiled cake is a raw material for composting and plantation is good
for honey production. We should absorb the best of technologies
available worldwide and start commercial operation soon, instead of
staying at pilot plant levels. I am happy that some of the States have
110 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
already taken initiatives in having Jatropha plantations in waste lands.
However, I also learnt that some farmers have problems in sale of
their Jatropha produce. Immediate attention should be given by the
respective State Governments to solve this problem so that those who
grow Jatropha do not suffer.
There has been a successful experiment which has been carried
out by Daimler-Benz in collaboration with CSIR laboratories of running
a Benz car from Pune to Delhi using 10% blend of bio-fuel, without
any modification to the engine. Now is the time for the state and
central governments to come out with the policy which can provide
answers to all the questions of the farmers, financial institutions,
entrepreneurs who are keen to set up the fully integrated bio-diesel
plant using Jatropha seeds from the plantation to production of bio
diesel, by-products and their marketing. It is said that a number of
foreign consultants have shown interest in taking up Jatropha plantation
and commissioning of plants in different areas of the country. I
would recommend ONGC take the lead and enable establishment of
model bio-diesel plants with the inputs of Jatropha coming from different
parts of the country. ONGC can also undertake research in collaboration
with Indian Institute of Petroleum and automobile industry for
progressive increase of bio-fuel percentage in blending. Ultimate aim
should be to find engines, which can run on bio-fuel alone. This
will enable ONGC to work for a target of realizing at least 30 million
tonnes of bio-fuels within the next decade. The second area where
ONGC can enter in a big way is harnessing of solar energy.
India is well poised for the generation of solar energy in view of
the continuous availability of sunshine throughout the year. Installation
of centralized solar photovoltaic systems, which can be fed to a grid,
will be a long-term economically viable solution with added benefits
of pollution control. I am not unaware of the fact that India's economic
growth requires addition of 500 MW installed capacity every two
weeks and only the well proven conventional technologies such as
Hydro, Thermal and Nuclear Plants can fulfil this demand in the short
term. But we need to think long term. Present solar cells have the
efficiency of 13 to 15%. But the research effort shows that, with the
advent of CNT/Polymer Composite Based Photovoltaic Cell, the
efficiency of Photovoltaic cell will increase to 50%. This can pave
the way for building mini 100 megawatt solar power stations in
different regions of the country like Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat
and Tamil Nadu. ONGC can plan one or two 100 megawatt captive
power plants based on solar energy in Rajasthan or Andhra Pradesh.
ONGC can also promote indigenous research on mission mode for
producing CNT polymer composite based photovoltaic cells with an
efficiency of 50% in collaboration with Universities and R&D
Another area of concern emanates from possible oil spills in our
ports and near our coasts. India's present demand for oil is met through
import of about 85 million metric ton per annum. Hundreds of tankers
are needed to meet the growing import of oil in the foreseeable future.
Even if a fraction of the oil imported through these tankers spills in
the Indian waters, besides posing environmental danger, there is no
comprehensive response mechanism in place to deal with this threat
to marine environment. An accident to even one of these very large
vessels can spill up to 100,000 tons of oil into the Indian coastal line.
India's 7500 kms coastline therefore needs to be safeguarded against
ecological devastation from such oil spills.
The need of the day is to launch a mission to deal with oil spills.
ONGC has substantial stake in oil production and therefore has to
take a lead to find technological response to oil spills in collaboration
with Indian Institute of Petroleum and Indian Universities.
I am happy to know that the ONGC has been promoting the
concept of PURA (Providing Urban Amenities in Rural Area) in different
oil producing zones. ONGC PURA envisages physical connectivity,
electronic connectivity and knowledge connectivity thereby creating
economic connecti vity in the village clusters of ONGC oil producing
zone. For employment generation in these areas, they can plan bamboo
plantation leading to value added bamboo products enterprises, value
added wax products, bio-fuel enterprises and other products based
on the core competence of the particular region. They can provide
knowledge connectivity through establishment of village knowledge
centres connected to Kisan call centres. This type of societal mission
112 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
will enable ONGC to nurture local talent for their prime activities in
addition to providing large scale employment to our youth in the rural
Within the next fifty years, ONGC must aspire to become a global
energy giant. They should explore jointly with others and be a pioneer
in large scale suppliers of energy for making India an energy independent
country. For realizing this, ONGC should adopt multiple strategies.
One of the important resources in the east and west coast is Methane
Hydrate deposits, which are expected to be available at a depth ranging
from 400 - 700 metres below the seabed. Seismic studies have shown
high probability of existence of these deposits. This can be tapped
for producing energy. High-pressure technology will be needed to
enhance the gas yield. In addition, ONGC must involve in renewable
energy area in a big way. Underground coal gasification is yet another
promising area where ONGC can achieve leadership. In essence,
I would suggest ONGC to give world leadership in management
of energy source, exploration of energy sources, diversification of
energy sources, technology in underground Coal Gasification and above
all finding new ways of tapping energy wherever it is, to meet the
ever- growing demand of the country. Once again let me greet all the
members of ONGC on this Golden Jubilee occasion. My best wishes
to the ONGC in their mission of making the nation energy independent
Energy Independence by the Year 2030
J AM DELIGHTED to be here in the beautiful environment of
Dehradun and visit the Indian Institute of Petroleum which is
carrying out important research work in the areas of refining technology,
analytical sciences and petroleum products application. During the
last 45 years, the Institute has carried out pioneering research in the
hydrocarbon sector and has led many products to industrial applications.
I am happy to know that the Institute has filed over 3 dozen patents in
India and abroad and is having industrial partnership in every one of
its projects. I congratulate the Institution for its significant contribution
for the growth of the petroleum refining and processing sector. I was
thinking what thoughts I could share with you. I have selected the
topic "Energy Independence : Role of IIP".
As you all know, our annual requirement of oil is 114 million
tonnes. Significant part of this is consumed in the Transportation Sector.
We produce only about 25 % of our total annual requirement, the
reserves of which are fast depleting. The presently known resources
and future exploration of oil and gas may give mixed results. The
import cost of oil and natural gas today is over Rs. 1,20,000 crores.
Oil and gas prices are escalating; the cost of a barrel of oil has doubled
within a year. This situation has to be combated. Keeping in mind
the changing scenario I would suggest to the Indian Institute of Petroleum
to provide thrust to research in the areas of alternate sustainable energy
sources such as bio-fuel, photovoltaic cell for conversion of solar
energy into electricity and hydrogen fuel cell.
We have nearly 63 million hectares of wasteland available in
the country, out of which 33 million hectares of wasteland have been
allotted for tree plantation. Certain multi-purpose trees such as Jatropha
Address to the Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun, 14 August 2005
114 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
can grow well in wasteland with very little water. Once grown, the
crop has fifty years of life. Fruiting can take place in this plant in two
years. It yields upto five tonnes per hectare oil seeds and produces
two tonnes of bio-diesel. Presently, the cost of bio-diesel through
the plant is approximately Rs.17 to Rs.19 per litre which can be
substantially reduced through choice of right size of the plant and
using high yield variety plantation which has already been established
by the researchers. Bio-diesel plants grown in 11 million hectares of
land can yield a revenue of approximately Rs.20,000 crore a year and
provide employment to over 12 million people both for plantation
and running of the extraction plants. This is a sustainable development
process leading to large scale employment of rural manpower. Also,
it will reduce the foreign exchange outflow paid for importing crude
oil, the cost of which is continuously rising in the international market.
Use of bio-diesel is carbon neutral. This oil can also be used for soap
and candle industries. De-oiled cake is a raw material for composting
and plantation is good for honey production.
Bio-diesel has so far not been used for a power plant of large
capacity. However, chemical analyses indicate that bio-diesel can safely
be used in gas turbines in combined cycle mode, as they are normally
used for high capacity power plants. Use of bio-diesel in diesel engines
has been well demonstrated.
A quick estimate of land requirements to meet the fuel needs of
a 500 MW combined cycle power plant is 2,70,000 hectares, which
is significantly large. The yield of bio-diesel is 1.62 tonnes/hectare.
The bio-diesel requirement for a 500 MW (CCGT plant) is
approximately 4,40,000 tonnes per annum operating at 70% plant
load factor. The bio-diesel cost is estimated to be around Rs.20 per
litre, which accounts for all the costs associated with plantation and
seed collection, oil extraction, trans-esterification and transportation.
The risks associated with Jatropha-derived bio-fuel appear to be low
as these can grow on degraded lands. However, the oil contents in
seeds can vary between 28 to 38% by weight.
Indian Institute of Petroleum should work with industry and
agriculture universities to design, develop and commission a bio-fuel
plant of one million tonne capacity per annum. It should also carry
out research to increase the blending of bio-fuel with diesel from the
existing 5% in a progressive manner so that we can aim at a power
plant or a prime mover run exclusively on bio-fuel. The research is
also required to improve the oil content of Jatropha seed from the
present 33% to at least 50% by weight. Another area of interest will
be to develop seeds, which can give regular fruiting throughout the
year. Development of such seeds can increase the productivity
Hydrogen holds the potential to provide a clean, efficient, reliable
and affordable supply of energy for meeting the growing energy needs
in India's economy while protecting the environment and ensuring
energy security. Transition from the present fossil fuel-based economy
to hydrogen economy will require many challenges to overcome
specially in the areas of production, storage, delivery, applications,
creating infrastructure, economics and public awareness on safety
and standards. Initially we have to concentrate on hydrogen production.
Some of the routes which IIP can follow are :
Microbial degradation of wastes like bagasse and other
Electrolysis of water for producing hydrogen gas using
Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Water Electrolyser
Steam reforming of methanol.
I am sure, IIP scientists can definitely make important contributions
in these developments with their vast experience in dealing with
petroleum refining and processing.
The current high capital costs of solar power stations can be
reduced by grid-locked 100 MW sized Very Large Scale Solar
Photovoltaic (VLSPV) or Solar Thermal Power Stations. In the very
near future, breakthroughs in nanotechnologies promise significant
increase in solar cell efficiencies from current 15% values to over
50% levels. These would in turn reduce the cost of solar energy
production. The IIP in collaboration with other research institutions,
116 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
universities and industrial partners should mount an R&D Programme
for developing high efficiency CNT-based Photo Voltaic Cells. They
should aim to develop a commercial product within the next three
years. This will definitely be an important contribution of the Indian
Institute of Petroleum in enabling the nation to achieve self-sufficiency
The energy scenario in the 21st century is going to see a major
shift. Very soon, oil and gas will see its finiteness. It is high time
that we realized this factor and work towards the fuel of the future. I
suggest that the Indian Institute of Petroleum should think now about
re-aligning its research contribution from petroleum to alternate futuristic
My best wishes to all members of Indian Institute of Petroleum
for success in their mission of assisting the nation in working towards
achieving energy independence by the year 2030.
Take Green Tech to the people
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of the Green
Building Congress 2005 organized by Confederation of Indian
Industry (CII). My greetings to the organizers, distinguished guests
and all the specialists from architecture, construction and support
industries participating in this congress. This congress is conducted
at the right time since the nation is working towards energy independence
and provision of adequate water supply to our people. As you succeed
and grow in your green building mission, your experience will be
very useful to the nation. An indicator of building a nation is its buildings.
I would like to talk on the topic "Take the Green Tech to the people".
Energy is the lifeline of modern societies. But today, India has
17% of the world's population, and has just 0.8% of the world's known
oil and natural gas resources. We might expand the use of our coal
reserves for some time and that too at a cost and with environmental
challenges. The climate of the globe as a whole is changing. Our
water resources are also diminishing at a faster rate. As it is said,
energy and water demand will soon surely be a defining characteristic
of our people's life in the 21st century.
Energy independence rests on two principles. The first, to use
less energy to provide services and cut down energy losses.
Simultaneously we should access technologies to provide a diverse
supply of reliable, affordable, renewable and environmentally
The typical features cited for green buildings are noteworthy
goals towards greater energy efficiency and use of renewable energies,
Address at the inauguration of Green Building Congress 2005, New Delhi,
118 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
efficient water management and above all caring for the environment.
In India, the attempt towards gathering experience by practically
implementing the green buildings had already commenced. Some are
already completed and many are in the pipe line. Maybe it is time for
us to study the economic and environment viability and also share
the experience on a continuing basis. This will popularize the mission
of green buildings and will one day percolate to every house that we
build in our society. Will it be possible, or green building will become
building of the high society? If it is so, I would not have been with
you. I am with you because there is hope.
It is reported that the total electric energy generated through various
methods such as thermal, hydro, nuclear, wind and other forms in
our country is about one trillion units in a year. Efforts should be
made to improve generation efficiency, to make full use of the installed
capacities. Out of this only around 600 to 700 billion reaches the
consumer due to various technical, distribution losses. It is necessary
to plug these losses. In addition our end use segments are not energy
efficient either. In a growing economy when our population is expected
to grow approximately at 1.3% energy consumption rate is expected
to grow at 4.3% per annum. This trend would strain the energy sector
to a large extent. Building sector being the major energy consumer
can contribute to a large extent to discuss this issue since green buildings
have the potential to save 30 to 40% energy. Some of the salient
features of the green building are:
(a) minimum disturbance to landscape and site condition,
(b) buildings have to be architectured with sun and earth orbit
conditions such that maximum natural light and breeze are
received and minimum heating is possible,
(c) use of non-toxic, recycled and environment-friendly building
(d) efficient use of water and water recycling,
(e) use of energy-efficient and eco-friendly equipment,
(f) use of renewable energy, and
(g) high quality indoor air, provisions for human safety and
comfort and friendly to differently challenged people.
I would like to narrate some of my experiences in Rashtrapati
Bhavan. In Rashtrapati Bhavan I have two offices, one in the ground
floor and the other one in the first floor. When I started working, I
found that all the doors and windows with beautiful curtains were
kept covered. Because of this practice, the electric lights used to be
switched on, from the time I enter the office until I complete my
work for the day. During my usual walk in Rashtrapati Bhavan it
occurred to me that when the beautiful sun is all around, why all the
doors and windows were covered with curtains and the room has been
made dark. Either the intention could be that the President should not
see the nature at its pure form or it is due to some security concerns.
I discussed this with my teams and finally I decided to open the curtains
and allow the sun light to come into my office. Once the curtains
were opened the available sun light was more than sufficient for my
work during the day time. Energy saving in every room is possible.
Even the visitors who come to meet me notice the difference. The
message is that when we design buildings we should ensure that we
are able to make maximum use of the nature's gift such as light, heat
and breeze for providing the comfortable living for the occupants. In
all the government buildings, we should ensure that the offices are
not hidden by curtains. I had an opportunity to see a practical
implementation of this in Hyderabad green building and in many
locations in Iceland. I am happy to be talking to the experts in the
evolution of the green building who have gathered here.
A few years back the prime motivation for us to consider the
renewable energy alternatives to the fossil fuel was the concern for
our environment alone, much less due to economic reasons. The recent
trends in the uncontrolled increase in the cost of fossil fuels have
almost nullified their economic advantage. Besides, the newer
technologies such as CNT (Carbon Nano Tubes), will improve the
efficiency of solar cells, the hydrogen fuel cells and many such green
technologies economically very attractive as well. Rashtrapati Bhavan
120 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
is considering generation of electricity from renewable resources to
take care of its energy needs. One such proposal under consideration
amongst many is the setting up of an 8 MGW Grid locked Solar Power
Photovoltaic Plant occupying an area of300 by 300 metres for supplying
the entire Rashtrapati Bhavan Building complex including the estate.
The total energy consumed presently is 10,800 MGW hour per year.
This plant apart from providing energy will reduce the dumping of
carbon-di-oxide by 12,000 tonnes per year, 5760 kg of sulphur oxide
and 2720 kg of harmful nitrogen oxide. The cost of the plant will be
fully paid back by the saving in the electricity charges in less than 20
While the world of science and technology is focusing on
improving the efficiency of photo voltaic cells using nano technology
through aligned CNTs to make economic sense of generation of Solar
Photo Voltaic energy, many other avenues of using solar energy are
also being attempted the world over. One such route is to utilize the
solar thermal. They use solar collectors intelligently to provide power
for hot water and other heaters; in fact for lighting, fans, lifts, air
conditioners etc. are from solar thermal. I consider the combination
of the two systems may be even better than the generation of electricity
The factors stated above are qualitative factors. Since CII has
already constructed the green building at Hyderabad and established
all the features, it is time we made a quantitative assessment of the
energy saved, water saved, pollution reduction in the atmosphere and
enhancement of the efficiency of the people working in the building.
Also, this building can be used as a platform for incorporating further
features and experimenting before they can be applied to future green
I understand that the second green building which has achieved
Platinum rating with 170,000 sq. feet built-up area has come up in
Gurgaon. It will be interesting to compare the overall performance
of Gurgaon building with the Hyderabad building for generating more
information which will facilitate realization of full benefits while
replicating such buildings in different parts of the country. Is the
Gurgaon building greener than the Hyderabad one? Presently, thirteen
members of CII are in the process of constructing green buildings in
India and in different parts of the world. There is a need to motivate
all the five thousand members of CII to incorporate the green building
concepts in their future constructions and also mount a programme
to convert their existing buildings into green buildings. This issue
may be discussed in the Green Building Congress. The magnitude of
energy conservation tasks is so high that we should rapidly move out
of pilot systems and demonstration units. There has to be a massive
time-bound programme for such a conversion and introduction of
green practices into our standard building codes. Here I would like
to mention about the resource-efficient TERI Retreat for environmental
awareness and training which has come up in Gurgaon with an energy
saving of over 40%. I hope CII will take a lead by persuading its
members and creating an industry which can take green building
construction and conversion into major commercial activity with societal
I have one question in my mind. In our country, there are 300
million people who are in the mid-income group category and about
260 million people are living below poverty line. Every one of them
dreams about having a roof above their head. In order to make their
dreams a reality we need about 100 to 150 million houses to be built
in the next 15 years. In fact this massive construction effort will
form the backbone of our economy. Today when we talk about the
green buildings, it always means a high society building or a high
tech laboratory. This Green Building Congress should address how
you would give the benefit of the green technology to the middle
class and below. While you are thinking of a few hundreds of high
tech and high value, specialized green buildings, you can also think
of building millions of energy and water efficient dwellings, for the
large population of the nation. While creating the building codes which
include standards for green practices, it is also important to keep in
122 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
mind the special safety requirements for earthquake prone and coastal
regions. I feel "take the green tech to the people" has to be the agenda
Now I would like to move on to another important programme
of rural habitat which can decongest metros and cities, thus providing
excellent opportunities for energy conservation. In a sense they will
be new forms of green habitats for India while providing also economic
and social opportunities to our rural citizens. The integrated methods
which will bring prosperity to rural India are: the physical connectivity
of the village clusters through quality roads and transport; electronic
connectivity through tele-communication with high bandwidth fibre
optic cables reaching the rural areas and also through broadband wireless;
knowledge connectivity through education, skill training for farmers,
artisans and craftsmen and entrepreneurship programmes. These three
connectivities will lead to economic connectivity through starting of
enterprises with the help of banks, micro credits and marketing of the
products. I see in the PURA programme potential for large scale
employment generation. The integrated method envisages a mission
mode empowered management structure with executive powers at
the local implementation levels and by reducing the transactional costs
through simplification of procedures of governance. Hence, the
important element of rural development happens to be PURA. Each
PURA complex will need a large number of dwelling units, hospitals,
educational institutions and buildings to house small and medium
scale industries. It is essential to plan all these buildings using the
green building concept for bringing down the recurring energy
expenditure on the establishments and for the PURA household.
Building such nationwide practices requires a large human resource
and change in the mindset of the people. The architects and building
planners have to play a very important role in the design of the building
with the green and safety features. The seeds of this perspective have
to be sown in the schools of architecture and town planning. Energy
conservation should start right from the location of the site, the direction
of buildings, windows, doors and glare. The aim should be to use the
sun and wind to the maximum advantage, while minimizing the wasteful
heat load from the sun into the buildings and roofs.
While planning for green buildings in all the sectors of the
economy, the availability of materials and equipment will become
one of the major issues. Towards this objective, there will be a need
to network with several manufacturers in India to create new products
and new markets. A few green materials and equipment which are
available in the country are: fly-ash cement, fly-ash block, recycled
aluminum, recycled steel, recycled tiles, low VOC (Volatile Organic
Compounds) paints, bamboo based products, high performance glass,
energy efficient equipment & systems, HFC (Hydro Fluoro Carbon)
based high efficiency chillers, building controls, green roof, recycled
wood, etc, However, they are now being produced in miniscule
In addition to the above, we have to work on the development of
composting toilets, minimum water utilities, low VOC adhesives
and sealants, Carpet and Rug Institute (CRI) certified carpets, Forest
Stewardship Council (FSC) certified wood, high albedo roof paints,
building integrated photo voltaic systems, Cooling Tower Institute
(CTI) certified cooling towers, living machines (biological waste water
treatment systems), etc. While developing and producing these items,
we have also to work on standardization and certification of products.
We need to have competent multiple agencies to enable speedy and
reliable certification. The material and equipment for green buildings
is an important economic activity which will generate employment
of a large number of our youth for the construction sector.
I have a few suggestions to make for this Green Building
(a) Document the experiences (both successes and problems)
from the Hyderabad and Gurgaon green buildings. This may
lead to green building code evolution and a process for the
best practices. While doing so, the rating systems for green
buildings developed by The Energy and Resources Institute
124 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
(TERI) including the Indian codes, standards and best
practices may also be taken into account.
(b) A green building should not only be energy and environment
friendly, but also aesthetically beautiful and economically
viable. A transparent cost benefit analysis will bring many
people into the movement of green building revolution.
(c) The green technology of the future will have a significant
component of high tech and leading edge research and
development in material science and standardized
manufacturing processes including the use of prefabricated
(d) A nationwide certification programme for the builders and
architects for their green and safety awareness must be
(e) Water harvesting and recycling will make every building
less dependent on external water supply, thus reducing the
load on the town and city resources.
(f) The green tech itself will become sustainable only when it
reaches the rural population, that too to the millions in a
(g) The Indian Green Building Congress can create a website
and seek inputs from experts on traditional architectural
approach to building design for long term gains and better
environmental adaptations. Opinions and advice received
from various agencies can be evaluated by expert teams for
inclusion in the green building code.
The earth is a living planet. In our galaxy, earth is probably the
only living planet. We have therefore a great responsibility not to
hurt it. For our future generations to survive, we must be friendly to
earth and lovable in taking from it.
Presently, we are generating one trillion units of power for a
billion population with certain economic strengths. And also we are
using nearly 800 billion cubic metre (BCM) water both ground and
surface. Our aim should be to conserve at least 10 to 15% of energy,
i.e. 100 billion units and 10% of water namely 80 BCM which will
have a large impact on our economy. A good part of the nation's
energy is consumed by the construction industry and the household.
By saving energy through green buildings, we will make the air much
purer to breathe. Green is safer, economically attractive and above
all healthy. I would suggest that this should be the basis on which the
"Green Building Congress 2005" should deliberate and prepare a decadal
plan for the nation for implementation.
I am happy to inaugurate the Green Building Congress 2005 and
wish the members success in their mission of making the nation green
through fruitful interactive deliberations and actions.
E-Governance to be Citizen-Friendly
T AM DELIGHTED to inaugurate the e-Governance Portal at
Rashtrapati Bhavan. I would like to discuss about "Citizen Centric
e-Governance: Technology and Management Policy".
Good governance is being recognised as an important goal by
many countries across the world. They have taken up specific initiatives
for open government. Freedom of information is being redefined and
supported by detailed guidelines. The internet revolution has proved
to be a powerful tool for good governance initiatives. An important
dimension of the internet potential is the possibility of providing services
any time anywhere. Along with this there is a conscious effort to put
the citizen as the centre of focus of the governance. Citizens are being
perceived as customers and clients. E-governance has to be citizen-
friendly. Delivery of services to citizens is considered as a primary
function of the government. Particularly in the democratic nation of
the billion people like India, e-Governance should enable seamless
access to information and seamless flow of information across the
state and central government in the federal set-up.
No country has so far implemented an e-governance system for
one billion people. It is a big challenge before us.
I visualize an election scenario, where a candidate files his
nomination from a particular constituency. Immediately the election
officer verifies his/her authenticity from the national citizen ID database
through multifactor authentication, through a multipurpose Citizen
ID card. His/her civic consciousness and citizenship behaviour comes
from the police crime record. His property record comes from the
registration of land authority across the country. His income and wealth
Address at the inauguration of e-Govemance Portal at Rashtrapati Bhavan, New Delhi,
resources come from the income-tax department, and other sources.
His education credentials come from the university records. His track
record of employment comes from various employers with whom he
had worked. His credit history comes form various credit institutions
like banks. His legal track records come from the judicial system.
All the details arrive at the computer terminal of the election
officer within a few minutes automatically by the act of e-govemance
software agent which crawls across the various state and central
government web services directories through the network and collects
the information automatically and presents the facts in real-time with
out any bias. Artificial intelligence software analyses his credentials
and gives a rating on how successful he will be as a politician. Election
officer sitting at the remote block of the country decides on the spot
and the election process starts. All the voters vote from their home
through virtual polling booths. Is it a dream? Is it possible? If possible,
when shall we have it? Can we provide good governance to our one
billion people? Can the governance speed up the delivery system?
Can the governance differentiate between genuine transactions and
spurious transactions? Can the governance ensure immediate action
for the genuine cases which satisfy the check list for a particular service
and keep pending the action on spurious transactions? Can this be
done by e-governance at a cost affordable by our nation? If we have
this system implemented then I call this as a true e-Govemance system
I am trying to seek an answer for these questions by asking another
set of questions. Do we have a required e-Governance framework?
Do we have a National Citizen database which will be the primary
unit of data for all governance vertical and horizontal applications
across the state and central governments? Do we have standards for
the exchange of secure information with non-repudiation, across the
state and central government departments seamlessly? Do we have a
secure delivery framework by means of virtual private network
connecting across the state and central government departments? Do
we have data centres in centre and states to handle the departmental
workflow automation, collaboration, interaction, and exchange of
information with authentication? Should we have our administrative
128 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
systems empowered and reformed to accelerate the decision making?
When will the entire administrative bodies be able to contribute more
for the national development rather than being entangled in the files?
I have just visualized the scenario. Let us try to find an answer to
each of the above questions towards providing good and smart
governance to our one billion people.
In summary, I visualize e-Governance as defined below:
"A transparent smart e-governance with seamless access, secure
and authentic flow of information crossing the inter-departmental barrier
and providing a fair and unbiased service to the citizen."
I have always been in my life an advocate of using technology
for the betterment of our society. E-Govemance is one such opportunity.
I want all of you to remember, the technology is a double edged sword.
If we don't have an implementation plan from concept to completion,
in less than one or two years, technology will become expensive and
we will not be able to reap the benefits. Hence I urge you to implement
the e-governance process extremely fast. While you are doing this,
you must also have a quantitative measure on the impact of e-govemance
on the society. Every year, you must be able to produce a number,
which states the number of people who have been touched by the
India is transforming into a transparent society. It is essential
that government functions which have interfaces or interactions with
public, especially where the state and central functionaries have to
serve or support and even correct the citizens, have to be done through
the tools of information technology and communication. This means,
software have to be written to codify the rules, procedures and other
related government functions, and public access should be through
IT. Then the government functions can provide equal access to all
based on predetermined rules and even with rules to govern exception
being done in a transparent manner. Since India has the core competence
in information technology and communication, the possibility of success
to bring in transparency in administration and management through
e-commerce and e-business leading to e-govemance, is definitely more.
Actions have to be initiated in a mission mode. Appropriate legal
instrument to provide government power to such mode of interactions
should also be done simultaneously.
The primary data requirement for the effective e-governance is
the National Citizen ID Card. It should be a multipurpose secured
and authentic ID card. This card should be akin to the Xerox copy of
the individual with the multifactor authentication such as photograph,
biometrics - fingerprint, iris-based systems and digital signature. India
with a population of one billion people should be concerned about
providing this card to the citizens at a cost-effective basis. Hence
there is a need to select the right technology for the preparation of the
card, and online issue of the card also needs to be determined urgently.
This challenge must be taken up by the consortium of public and
private industries, and academic institutions with the Government.
Presently the government is considering the discussion of a bill for
introducing multipurpose Citizen ID card.
Several state governments made significant use of IT in
government, integration of IT government services and their electronic
delivery - some of the examples are Gyandoot in Madhya Pradesh,
e-Seva in Andhra Pradesh, and Friends in Kerala. Andhra Pradesh,
Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu now provide on-line
registration of property transaction. The NCT of Delhi has recently
started electronic delivery of registration of birth and death. Karnataka
has fully deployed a computer application for the issue of land records
under the bhoomi project, and Tamil Nadu has implemented e-Rasi
project. In Karnataka computer application captures every single
transaction at all districts and Taluk treasuries. Some of the states
have developed application for Chief Minister Information System
for monitoring activities covering developmental programme, redressing
public grievances and disaster management systems. India's first VSAT-
based communication network VIDYUDNET, supports real-time data
applications for power generation and distribution. Some of these
systems can be replicated and used by other states to avoid the
duplication of efforts and to speed up the implementation process.
130 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
India has already established successful networks like NICNET
for connecting state and central government offices, ERNET to connect
Educational and Research institutions, RAILNET to connect Railway
networks, Airline network which connects the air ticket reservation
and its services, using the minimum network bandwidth and provides
services to the government units for the last 10 to 15 years. And India
also has a multitude of private entrepreneurs providing services. For
example, these networks are established for specific purposes and
address the vertical domains like government, education and research
institutions, and railways; these modes are working satisfactorily and
serve the purpose to those domain requirements. Railway network
and its Railway portal which provides the reservation, cancellations
and other services is the good and big working model in the country.
Time has come to integrate the functions of all the networks in a
seamless way and provide an internet exchange in the country much
the same way our telephone networks of multiple service providers
have been integrated. The inter-departmental communication is required
to provide citizen-centric services such as interaction, collaboration
and transaction with workflow.
These are the islands of successes. There are paths, but they are
disjointed. Everywhere there is computerization but they are not
interoperable. There are web-based services but again coupled with
manual processes which lead to delay.
A comprehensive e-Govemance framework needs to be evolved.
This framework encompasses the following:
1. Establishment of e-Govemance Commission or empowered
2. Establishment of e-Governance GRID across the state and
centre. Setting up of the Horizontal GRID across the state
governments and interconnecting the Horizontal GRIDS to
the Vertical Central GRID.
3. Setting up of e-Governance DATA Centre at the Centre and
State Levels and real time updation of data from various
units of the government.
4. Setting up a multipurpose, secure, authentic national citizen-
ID database as the primary data for all the e-governance
services and online issue of Citizen ID card seamlessly.
5. Electronic connectivity through dedicated Broadband, Virtual
Private Network (VPN) based connectivity from the Centre
to State, State to District and District to Block level and
Block to village level through the options like wireless,
microwave and VS AT. PURA scheme provides an impetus
to electronic and knowledge connectivity.
6. Create language independent operating systems, databases,
application servers, mail servers etc. in the Indian languages.
7. Ninety percent of work concerning e-governance should be
outsourced and government should only manage the Data
Centre and maintain it for on-line application.
These are the challenges that are before us; the conference can
discuss and bring out a comprehensive set of recommendations for
the effective implementation across the states and central government.
Today's technology in computers and communication has made
the death of time and distance, because the computer is extremely
fast and the technology is further improving everything that can be
solved within the time you have. The network is extremely fast and
there is no need to worry about the distance. There is a new paradigm
in the democratized information system "anytime anywhere the
information can be accessed".
I wish all success in the mission of promoting e-governance in
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the National Conference on
Legal Empowerment on the occasion of National Legal Literacy
Day being organized by the National Legal Services Authority. I
greet the Hon'ble Chief Justice of India, Hon'ble Justices of Supreme
Court and High Courts, judicial officers, legal educators, law students,
distinguished legal personalities, social organizations, citizens and
other participants. I am happy to see that the National Legal Services
Authority is organizing a national dialogue on the strengthening of
harmonious relationship between the three pillars of democracy namely
executive, legislature and judiciary. When I am with the legal
community let me share with you three experiences that have relevance
to providing justice in the rural areas with humane element.
During 1940's, when I was a school boy, every day after the
evening namaz, my father used to come back and sit outside (thinnai)
our home at Rameshwaram. Each day about 10 to 20 families or at
times individuals would come to my father and tell their problems on
land and house disputes, marriage conflicts and issues involving
forsaking of elderly parents. They will get a solution from my father
within two or three days. In a similar way, my mother used to meet
many womenfolk on Lridays. They will seek her advice. My elder
brother himself was Panchayat Court President. The court had five
good human beings from various walks of life with one State
Government representative. In those days, caste system was not visible
at all in that region. I used to see many disputes of human life being
settled in our own rural environment. Only if the disputes are not
Address at the National Conference on Legal Empowerment on the occasion of National
Legal Literacy Day, New Delhi, 9 November 2005
settled at these two levels they used to resort to higher courts. After
1970s, all these systems with human touch vanished and most of
these disputes are going to courts. I feel, since the Panchayat
environment is emerging in rural areas, the judicial system at the
Panchayat level also can take a shape with the same type of human
Eighty litigation-free villages in Chitrakoot is a good example
to be followed by many districts. This will substantially reduce the
load in our courts. Recently, I visited Deendayal Research Institute
in Chitrakoot, Madhya Pradesh. There I found that the institute is
facilitating a cohesive conflict-free society. As a result of this, I
understand that the eighty villages around Chitrakoot are almost
litigation free. The villagers have unanimously decided that no dispute
will find its way to the court. The differences will be sorted out amicably
in the village itself. This has happened because of the inspirational
leadership at Chitrakoot. This movement has to be encouraged in the
rural areas by different State Governments.
I had inaugurated a Mobile Legal Clinic in Ahmedabad in 2003.
Mobile Legal Services have two important benefits. Firstly, it creates
awareness among the rural population about their rights and
responsibilities and also creates a feeling of law and judiciary being
very close to the people. This mission should continue.
As an extension of this phenomenon I would recommend creation
of Mobile Courts that reach Taluka and Village level. The mobile
court can visit different villages and towns periodically and deliver
on-the-spot justice to the people, based on the facts and evidence.
The legal community can also simplify the procedure of filing the
cases and taking the witnesses and address the issue of innumerable
postponements. Today's conference should discuss all these three
aspects I am discussing, so that some sort of recommendation should
go to the government. Three experiences, which I have described,
may be considered by the legal community for necessary thoughts
134 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Now I would like to talk to you on the topic "Harmonious
Relationship among Legislature, Executive and Judiciary", based on
the topic suggested by the National Legal Services Authority.
Democracy dictates a system in which every citizen can without
fear of retribution breathe, express himself, pursue his or her interests
and in short, live a life of his or her choice as long as it is wholesome
and does not tread upon the rights of others to live their lives with
equal felicity. This presupposes a system of balances and counter
balances among various specifically identified functional components,
which together create, support and nurture the democratic system.
The Legislature, the Judiciary and the Executive are the components
of such a system.
In a healthy democratic system, each of these segments, pillars
as it were, has its own importance and relevance. To segregate one
from another altogether into watertight compartments would be less
than reasonable, basically because one cannot forget the linkages and
may I even say, interdependence among them to quite an extent. All
the same, for a democratic system to function in a healthy atmosphere,
conducive to the meaningful sustenance and purposeful progress of
the citizens, it is necessary to chalk out specific areas of domain for
each of these pillars with least encroachments on it from any of the
others. Such separation of powers is unmistakable by its presence in
all modern constitutions that support a truly democratic system.
The basic concept of the separation of powers would mean -
(a) The same persons should not form part of more than one of
the three organs of the Government,
(b) That one organ should not control or interrupt with the
working of another, and
(c) That one organ of Government should not exercise the
The innate provisions of freedom, democratic governance and
law are most secure when the three organs of the system function
independent of one another. Such a system is essential for the
In 1690, the Englishman John Locke wrote in his Second Treatise
of Civil Government, "It may be too great a temptation to humane
frailty, apt to grasp at power, for the same persons who have the power
of making laws, to have also in their hands the power to execute
them, whereby they may exempt themselves from obedience to the
laws they make, and suit the law, both in its making and execution, to
their own private advantage."
The French jurist, Montes-quieu, had this to say - " When the
legislative and executive powers are united in the same person, or in
the same body of magistrates, there can be no liberty. Again, there is
no liberty, if the judicial power were not separated from the legislative
and executive. Were it joined with the legislative, the life and liberty
of the subject would be exposed to arbitrary control; for the judge
would then be the legislator. Were it joined to the executive, however,
the judge might behave with violence and oppression. There would
be an end to everything, were the same man, or the same body, whether
of the nobles or of the people, to exercise those three powers, that of
enacting laws, that of executing the public resolutions, and of trying
the causes of individuals."
The Legislature is primarily concerned with enactment of general
rules of laws that are germane to all aspects of the conduct of its
citizens and institutions. Basically this highlights that it is the will of
the people, the sheet anchor of any democratic system that is reflected
in the formation of the Legislature, which determines for the common
good all the laws and regulations that are to be followed.
Evolving such a legal system of rules and regulations is one thing,
but pursuit of activities according to them within the framework of
the main system has other facets, which bring in the other two pillars
like the Judiciary and the Executive.
Judiciary, as an independent specialized legal system of
interpretation and enforcement of laws and regulations, untrammelled
136 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
by the Legislature and Executive is absolutely unavoidable in any
healthy democratic system. The functions of the Judiciary transcend
the simple determination of disputed questions of fact and law and
encompass an altogether new dimension of even discharging legislative
functions of a different character and calibre without encroaching
upon the domain of the Legislature. I am referring to the evolution
of case-laws that arise from interpretation of the rules, laws and
regulations laid down by the Legislature, of course, consistent with
the basic structure of the Constitution. It would not be an exaggeration
to say that the interpretation by the Judiciary of the laws and regulations
as also the evolution of case laws add flesh and blood to the basic
structure of the Constitution which reigns supreme under all
circumstances. In a mature democracy, it is important that judges are
independent both of Parliament and the Government.
The third pillar namely, the Executive is also expected to be as
independent as possible and free of intrusions from the other two.
All along it has been said that Executive is the third pillar of democracy,
which is independent of the other two. I, however, have a different
view. Please do bear with me if I say that the independence that is
expected of this pillar is only in theory and mostly eroded in actual
practice. How can we expect to have an Executive to function
independently when each of its actions is questioned and its functioning
is made regularly actionable by and accountable to the independent
powers enjoyed by the Legislature and the Judiciary? Large number
of regulations exist to constantly keep the actions of the Executive
under the watchful glare of the Legislature and the Judiciary and that
unquestionably takes away the much bandied-about independence of
the Executive. Controls and provisions for interpretations and
answerability are also applicable to the Legislature and the Judiciary
but in their cases, a built-in system from within would be available
for discharging those functions. What happens with the Executive in
actual practice is nowhere near such a state of affairs and to that extent
I would decidedly not support the contention that the Executive is as
independent in its existence and functioning as the Legislature or the
Judiciary is. I am not even for a moment questioning the whys or
why nots of such controls on the Executive; I am merely stating a
fact that I personally have perceived watching our democratic system
It does not need an expert to aver that though the independence
of these three pillars is a must for a good democracy in its true form
to be maintained and nurtured, there is absolute need to strike at a
harmonious balance among them in their discharge of all functions
within the system and within the Constitutional framework. What is
required is a conscious realization of unseen boundaries that cannot
be traversed without causing embarrassment and even injustice to
the democratic system and the rights of its citizens. Realisation by
each one that the other two are equally vital and significant is essential
for a healthy democratic system. Stand off between these systems
can only be at the cost of the system itself and is sure to put the
system in peril. It is not practicable nor is it advisable to specifically
lay down these boundaries to make them inviolable but each of these
three pillars is enlightened enough to circumscribe its area of operation
to consistently and consciously avoid intrusion into another's territory
even where the dividing line is slim and even vague.
This will be possible only if everyone of us realizes the ultimate
sanctity of the Constitution and its basic framework that had been so
carefully crafted by those who knew what to do and did what they
did for the nation's future.
All of us, irrespective of the segment of the system to which we
belong, have to regulate ourselves by a code of behaviour, ordained
by the Constitution, tacitly or otherwise. Freedom available to a segment,
seemingly unfettered by the mandate of the so-called majority, is for
formulating wholesome legalistic stipulations within the framework
of the Constitution for common good and not for imprudent enactments
that have just transient appeal to one particular section or another.
Likewise, discreetness is a virtue to be cultivated with alacrity and
exercised with circumspection and calculated discretion. The pen,
having writ, can certainly move on... with telling effect, to say the
least. If one of the organs of the system arranges a midnight rendezvous
compromising the rule of law by entering into compromises with
138 APJ ABDUL UAL AM : SELECTED SPEECHES
outlaws, it is not exactly getting swathed in glory, but the rule of law
gets ravished and the whole system gets relegated with an ever-bleeding
wound. Independence of jurisdiction does not mean liberty to licence.
Friends, I am not pontificating from the Presidential pedestal but I
am only voicing as a concerned citizen his concerns about the denial
of the fruits of the rule of law implicitly, yet unmistakably promised
to him and his kind by the Constitution of India.
Privileges are meant to be enjoyed with prudence by those on
whom they are conferred; they are not meant to make others suffer
and certainly they are not meant to be flaunted. Rights are meant to
be exercised for achieving the right thing; they are not to be brandished.
Politeness and moderation are virtues devoutly to be wished for and
self-restraint by each of the organs coupled with respect for the others
should become a conditionality to be consciously remembered and
conscientiously followed with unflinching loyalty, sincerity and honesty.
The earlier the realization comes to each of these pillars, that one
cannot live without the other two, for a healthy and dynamic sustaining
democratic system, the better for all of us. We should strive to see
real democracy blossom forth into a system that allows free flow of
the citizen's genuine aspirations. This should facilitate them not only
to express but also to develop them further on their own without treading
on the others' feet. Such realization would automatically lead to self-
discipline and that would be the best prescription for a healthy and
My best wishes to the members of National Legal Services
Authority in their mission of promoting nobility injustice to all the
citizens of the nation.
PURA - An Instrument for Development
w HEN I AM giving this award, 1 would like to recall the famous
statement of Smt. Indira Gandhi, when she was the chairperson
of the Non-Aligned movement, "Bom of the universe, we cannot narrow
our loyalties. Belonging to humankind, nothing human can be alien
to us." The award reflects the borderless attributes needed in today's
modern world, an ideal for which Smt. Indira Gandhi stood.
Her Royal Highness Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhom of Thailand
has been responsible for cultural preservation, through revival and
fostering of handicraft skills, shadow plays and classical works of
music recorded for posterity. By singing and performing in public
with Thais of all walks of life, she has helped spur an unprecedented
revival of traditional music. We greatly admire the participation of
Her Highness in the sustainable development work initiated by the
King of Thailand in alleviating poverty in the country. Our late
Prime Minister Smt. Indira Gandhi was strongly committed for pursuing
an agenda of development and poverty alleviation which while ensuring
growth also focused on bridging the gap between the wealthy and the
economically deprived. Her commitment to the promotion of science
and technology and marshalling their application to the development
of the nation particularly the rural areas was a deep and abiding one.
I am delighted to assign the Indira Gandhi Prize for Peace,
Disarmament and Development to Her Royal Highness Princess Maha
Chakri Sirindhorn of Thailand for the great services rendered by her
The bi-lateral ties between India and Thailand have been built
on a strong foundation of ancient, historical, religious and commercial
Address at the Presentation of the Indira Gandhi Prize for Peace, Disarmament and
Development 2004, New Delhi, 19 November 2005
140 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
links. Many of the experiences of Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn
have direct relevance in the Indian context where rural development
has become one of the key issues and a critical component for national
To translate this concept of uplifting the rural citizens, India now
has planned a programme called PURA meaning Providing Urban
amenities in the Rural Areas. PURA envisages providing physical
connectivity, electronic connectivity and knowledge connectivity to
a cluster of villages leading to sustainable economic growth. For
developing nations PURA will be the instrument for development.
Hence, I would like to share some of the Indian experiences.
I would like to describe one of the PURA complexes, which has
been developed in Vallam, Thanjavur district of Tamil Nadu involving
60 villages with a population of 3 lakhs. This PURA complex has all
the three connectivities - physical, electronic and knowledge - leading
to economic connectivity. The centre of activity emanates from the
women engineering college that provides the electronic and knowledge
connectivity. Periyar PURA has health care centres, primary to post
graduate level education and vocational training centres. This has
resulted in large scale employ ment generation and creation of a number
of entrepreneurs with the active support of 850 self-help groups. Two
hundred acres of waste land has been developed into a cultivable
land with innovative water management schemes such as contour ponds
and water sheds for storing and irrigating the fields. All the villagers
are busy in cultivation, planting Jatropha, herbal and medicinal plants,
power generation using bio-mass, food processing and above all running
marketing centres. This model has emanated independent of any
government initiative. The committed leadership has been provided
by the engineering institution. This gives me the confidence that PURA
is a realizable proposition and this movement can be multiplied by
thousands of entrepreneurs, educational administrators, small scale
industrialists and bankers with the support of the government agencies.
I have also seen similar PURA complexes in Loni, Maharashtra and
Chitrakoot in Madhya Pradesh. Learning from the work of Her Royal
Highness we feel that PURA should also have a cultural connectivity.
This model of rural development is applicable to many countries
in the developing world. India has taken this as a mission and many
organizations are working in collaboration with the local government.
Many people may wonder about the link between peace,
disarmament and development which Indira Gandhi Prize symbolizes.
One of the main causes of disruption of peace is terrorism. The answer
to prevention of terrorism lies in creating a prosperous, happy and
peaceful society. Here I find the work of Her Royal Highness Princess
Maha Chakri Sirindhorn of Thailand very useful for promoting the
cause of the poor and women empowerment.
Her Royal Highness Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn of Thailand
is no stranger either to India or Indology. She herself is a great scholar
in Sanskrit and Indology. Maybe this combination and her frequent
visits to India and her in-depth study of many parts of India, would
have fuelled her urge to find peace in the world through rural
We are indeed happy that Her Royal Highness Princess Maha
Chakri Sirindhorn has been chosen by the jury for the prestigious
Indira Gandhi Prize for Peace, Disarmament and Development for
the great services rendered by her for humankind. I congratulate Her
Royal Highness Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn and wish her all
success in her mission of promoting development and peace to
Solutions for a Transparent Society
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of the Regional
Conference of the South Asian Chapters of Transparency
International India. I am happy that the Transparency International
India has taken the initiative of arranging this Conference in India,
which will give very useful suggestions for improving the governance
system. This will also enable maximization of value addition for a
given expenditure incurred by the Government in providing the services
to the citizens. My greetings to Admiral Tahliani and his team, the
social reformers, intellectuals, students and other delegates participating
in the conference. I particularly greet Prof (Dr.) Peter Eigen and the
International delegates for participating in this Conference and sharing
the thoughts on the strategies to be followed for promoting a transparent
society. I would like to discuss on the topic "Possible solutions for
It has the following components:
1. Transparency starts at home
2. Mission of the teacher
3. Elevating the young minds
4. Code of conduct
5. Trust and confidence in Governance
6. Elimination of Poverty
7. e-Governance for transparent Administration
8. Some good examples in Governance
Address during the inauguration of the Regional Conference of the South Asian
Chapters of Transparency International India, New Delhi, 25 November 2005
(a) Training and empowerment
On 21st November 2005,1 had visited Adhichunchanagiri Math,
attended a function of FUREC (Foundation for Unity of Religions
and Enlightened Citizenship) and interacted with over 54,000 students
of various schools and colleges of Karnataka. There a 10th class student
Ms. M. Bhavani studying in Adichunchanagiri Composite High School,
Sharavathy Nagar, Shimoga asked me the following question.
"Sir, What is the role of students to stop corruption which is
deeply rooted in our country just like cancer?"
Agony of the young mind is reflected in this question. For me it
was an important question, since it came from a young mind. I was
thinking what type of solutions we could give. My thought process
I said there are one billion people in the country and nearly 200
million homes. In general there are good citizens everywhere. However,
if we find that people in a few million houses are not transparent and
not amenable to the laws of the country, what can we do? These
houses apart from parents have one daughter or one son or both. If
the parents in these houses are deviating from the transparent path
the children can use the tool of love and affection and correct the
parents to come back to the right path. I asked all the children assembled
in that gathering, in case parents of a few children get deviated from
transparency, will you children boldly tell your parents, father or mother,
you are not doing the right thing, that is what we are taught by you
and in the school. Most of the children spontaneously responded, "We
will do it". The confidence comes from them that they have love as a
tool. Similarly I have also asked the parents in some other meeting,
initially there was a silence, later, many of them hesitantly agreed
that they would abide by the children's suggestion since it is driven
by love. They took an oath from me. The oath was "I will lead an
honest life free from all corruption and will set an example for others
144 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
to adopt a transparent way of life". Finally I told the students that
they should start a movement starting from their home.
School is the next important environment where the character is
getting shaped. The prime learning period for the children is five to
seventeen years of age. The student spends approximately 25,000
hours in the school campus. Of course, at home, love and affection
are imparted but again most of the time of the day is spent in preparing
school's homework and study, eat, play and sleep. Hence the school
hours for children are the best time for learning and need best of
environment, mission-oriented learning with value system. I still hear
the echo from Bestolozzy, a Greek teacher's saying, "give me a child
for seven years. Afterwards, let the God or devil take the child. They
cannot change the child." That is the great confidence of the teacher.
What a golden mission for the teachers of great character and value
system in our schools in the country!
While I was in college, I remember the lectures given by the
highest authority of the Jesuit institution Rev Father Rector Kalathil
of St. Joshep's college, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu. Every week on
Monday, he will take class for an hour. He used to talk about good
human beings, present and past, and what makes a good human being.
In this class he used to give lectures on personalities such as Buddha,
Confucius, St. Augustine, Califa Omar, Mahatma Gandhi, Einstein,
Abraham Lincoln including some scientific personalities and moral
stories linked to our civilizational heritage. He also used to talk about
great personalities living in the father's lodge and who had made
contribution with values in the service of the people. It is essential in
the secondary schools and colleges to arrange a lecture by a great
teacher of the institution once in a week for one hour on India's
civilizational heritage. This class can be called as a Moral Science
Class. That will elevate the young minds to love the country, to love
the other human beings and elevate the young to higher planes.
Now I am reminded of a Tamil classic, which brings out the
power of righteousness and provides the code of conduct for the people
in high and responsible positions:
It means, people who are in high and responsible positions, if
they go against righteousness, the righteousness itself will get
transformed into a destroyer. Whoever deviates from righteousness,
whether they are individuals or states, they are responsible for their
own actions. This message is brought out very clearly by Elangovadikal
in Silapathikaram. Silapathikaram is one of the five great epics written
nearly 2000 years ago in Tamil language. So far I have been talking
about the strategies needed for creation of enlightened citizens and
transparency in the youth phase. Now I would like to discuss the
governance and delivery mechanism for the people, which is one of
the requirements of the democratic system.
As a part of governance, the Government needs to provide multiple
facilities and services to the people. Also, these services are required
to be constantly upgraded with the use of technology for fulfilling
the aspirations of the people. The Government budgets and expends
a large amount of funds for fulfilling this goal. The money for the
work comes from people through taxes. It is the money collected
from the people, which is being spent for the benefit of all the people
and particularly the needy. However, when it comes to reaching of
the benefits to the common man, the value of the services, which
reaches the citizen, is much below the expected level of satisfaction.
This happens in all the services namely education, health care, sanitation,
water, power, road, drainage, tele-communication, seeking of loans
from the banks for agriculture and small-scale industries and many
other areas of societal importance. Even to make the timely payment
for certain services the citizens have to struggle and sometimes pay
bribes to make the payment.
The Government is responsible for bringing the smiles on the
faces of billion people by enacting appropriate policies, laws and
facilitating societal transformation. Management style varies naturally
146 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
with the policies and procedures, which are mostly based on mistrust
and distrust. As a result, motivation and empowerment, at the
implementation levels, are dampened and suppressed, whereas Indian
people have shown enormous resilience and have achieved phenomenal
success when provided with an environment of trust and confidence
in the working space. Whenever there has been a programme run on
mission mode through a specially conceived management structure
we have been realizing very satisfactory results whether in government,
quasi-government or private. We have examples that even for
governance-related items there are models where a focused mission
mode operation has helped. Recently, we saw such a mission mode
operation. Now, let us look at our national challenges.
Our nation is going through a major challenge of uplifting of
260 million people who are below the poverty line. They need habitat,
they need food, they need health care, and they need education and
employment finally resulting in a good life. Our GDP is growing at
more than 7% per annum, whereas, the economists suggest that to
uplift the people below poverty line, our economy has to grow at the
rate of 10% per annum consistently, for over a decade.
To meet the needs of one billion people whose number will further
increase, we have a mission of transforming India into a developed
nation. We have identified five areas where India has core competencies
for integrated action: (1) Agriculture and food processing, (2) Reliable
and Quality Electric power, Surface transport and Infrastructure for
all parts of the country, (3) Education and Health care, (4) Information
and Communication Technology, and (5) Strategic sectors. These
five areas are closely inter-related and when effectively addressed,
would lead to food, economic, energy and national security.
For implementation of these programmes in an integrated way
and in a time-bound manner in a cost-effective fashion and also to
provide the necessary services to the citizens equitably with ease, it
is essential that we use the technologies available today and work out
a comprehensive e-govemance system for all government to government
and government to citizens transactions.
Indian democracy has been functioning effectively for the last
six decades. In a vibrant democracy we have accomplished many
successful missions by many governments. We have brought down
the poverty level to 26% with the growing population and today India
is one of the emerging strong economies of the world because of our
limited opening up of our economy in the post 1991 period. However,
our growth rate is slow. The causes attributed for this slow growth
rate are the administrative system, large accumulation of pending cases
in our courts, the number of controls exercised by the administrative
system and the government running many of economic activities rather
than opening it up to the specialists in a competitive environment. In
spite of these severe constraints, our youth have excelled in knowledge
domain and have shown a phenomenal growth in ICT sector employing
over one million people and have achieved the revenue target of $28
billion in 2004. In the same way, service sector has achieved 7.6%
of annual growth for the last decade whereas agriculture and
manufacturing sector have shown slow growth rate. This gives us an
idea that wherever there is an independence to perform we have
performed well whereas wherever we have created large amount of
dependency through complex policies, procedures and subsidies, our
performance has been stunted and transparency diminishes. There is
a need to introspect on this dependency syndrome, which we have
created. We need to remove these dependencies systematically and
allow the people to perform in a competitive environment in the global
market. This will involve re-formulation of polices and procedures
prevalent in the legislature, executive and judiciary keeping in mind
the changing scenario of the world, challenges to be faced by the
economic sector in the global competitive environment and meeting
the aspirations of the people in providing a higher quality of life. All
Government programmes must consider citizen as a privileged customer
and become accountable for providing all the services needed by him
without interruption and hassles. One of the means by which this
can be ensured is the incorporation of a sound e-governance system
in all the three pillars of democracy. Keeping this aspect in mind, I
would like to share the thoughts on implementation of e-Governance
system for providing transparent administration.
148 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Good governance is being recognized as an important goal by
many countries across the world. They have taken up specific initiatives
for open government. Freedom of information is being redefined and
supported by detailed guidelines. The Internet revolution has proved
to be a powerful tool for good governance initiatives and the world is
moving towards Internet governance. An important dimension of the
Internet potential is the possibility of providing services any time
anywhere. Along with this there is a conscious effort to put the citizen
as the centre of focus of the governance. Citizens are being perceived
as customers and clients. E-governance has to be citizen-friendly.
Delivery of services to citizens is considered as a primary function of
the government. Particularly in a democratic nation of a billion people
like India, e-Govemance should enable seamless access to information
and seamless flow of information across the state and central government
in the federal set-up.
I visualize an election scenario, where a candidate files his
nomination from a particular constituency. Immediately the election
officer verifies his/her authenticity from the national citizen ID database
through multifactor authentication, through a multipurpose Citizen
ID card. His education credentials come from the school or university
records. His track record of employment comes from various employers
with whom he had worked. His income and wealth resources come
from the income-tax department, and other sources. His property record
comes from the registration of land authority across the country. His
credit history comes form various credit institutions like banks. His/
her civic consciousness and citizenship behaviour comes from the
police crime record. His legal track records come from the judicial
All the details arrive at the computer terminal of the election
officer within a few seconds automatically by the act of e-Go vernance
software agent which crawls across the various state and central
government web services directories through the network GRID and
collects the information automatically and presents the facts in real
time without any bias. Artificial intelligence software analyses his
credentials and gives a rating on how successful he will be as a politician.
Election officer sitting at the remote block of the country decides on
the spot and the election process starts. All the voters vote from their
home through virtual polling booths. Is it a dream? Is it possible? If
possible, when shall we have it? Can we provide good governance to
our one billion people? Can the governance speed up the delivery
system? Can the governance differentiate between genuine transactions
and spurious transactions ? Can the governance ensure immediate
action for the genuine cases, which satisfy the checklist for a particular
service and keep pending, the action on spurious transactions? Can
this be done by e-governance at a cost affordable by our nation? If
we have this system implemented then I can call this as an ideal example
of the effective e-governance system for the citizen. E-governance
system is a means to an end. We need enlightened citizens to realize
the full benefits of the e-governance systems. It is people who finally
uphold ethics, morality and righteousness.
Now I would like to discuss some of the good practices followed
in the three pillars of our democracy.
The passing of the Right to Information Act 2005, Right to
Education Act, and the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
2005 are some of the recent examples of the effective functioning of
legislative system. These Acts are structured to fulfil the aspirations
of our citizens particularly the poor.
Some of the key accomplishments of the executive have been
the time bound realization of the metro railway system in Delhi, limited
e-governance implementation in certain States like Kerala, Gujarat
and Andhra Pradesh bringing about substantial transparency in the
provision of government to citizen services. A working validated
model of railway reservation system, virtual university initiative of
the three old universities of the country namely Madras, Calcutta and
Mumbai and the health care services of the Karnataka Government
through Yeshaswini scheme are the other notable accomplishments
of the executive which have positive impact on large number of citizens
150 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
There is a model available in Karnataka, where the Lokayukta
has become pro-active in unearthing corruption and irregularities in
various Government departments. Having the same powers as his
counterparts in other States, he visits offices and hospitals to personally
check on cases of irregularities and corruption. Due to the proactive
action, I understand that Lokayukta has been able to unearth property
worth Rs.250 Crores which was amassed disproportionate to known
The judgments of the Supreme Court and some High Courts are
now available in the Internet. This step has considerably relieved the
agony of the litigants and also enables others to use these judgments
in their areas of interest. It is a giant leap. It is essential that all other
Courts in the country also follow this model and that has to be enforced
by the Law Ministry, State Govt and the higher judiciary. In addition
to this, for example, the landmark judgment on the use of CNG and
interlinking of rivers has large impact on the welfare of the society
such as elimination of pollution in big cities and mitigating the miseries
of the people from the flood and drought.
Let me now describe my personal experience in setting up and
operating a typical e-governance portal established at Rashtrapati
Bhavan. Rashtrapati Bhavan has introduced connectivity with our
citizens, institutions, universities, government departments and multi
lateral agencies during the last three years. For enabling such
connectivity, all the important events in which the President participates
are brought out in the website (www.presidentofindia.nic.in) as soon
as the functions are over. Today, on an average, this website has a hit
rate of over 250,000 per day. On certain special occasions like
Independence Day, Republic Day, it touches nearly a million hits. In
addition, I receive over 500 e-mails and 500 letters on an average
from various people from all over the country and abroad. I also
receive hundreds of questions from the students and children every
day. We have built in an e-governance system to study all the
correspondence on a day to day basis, analyze, prioritize, verify and
determine the action requirements to be taken by Rashtrapati Bhavan
and other agencies of government and the relevant institutions both
public and private. We have now established a near paperless dynamic
and secured workflow system for the file movements. All the officers
in Rashtrapati Bhavan are being connected through Wi-Max. We have
a Fibre broad band POP (Point of Presence) that can connect up to 64
Mbps. We have established within Rashtrapati Bhavan facilities for
G2G and G2C connectivity and we are in the process of establishing
the high bandwidth broadband VPN connectivity with Central and
State Governments and other relevant institutions for seamless flow
of information within the existing systems and procedures of
Governmental functioning. This is called the e-Governance GRID.
We will soon have all the transactions between Rashtrapati Bhavan
and various ministries, Central and State governments through this
e-Governance GRID. Similarly, Central Governments and State
government should establish the e-Governance GRID at state, district,
block and village levels. This will ensure the transparency in the
administrative delivery system and enable provision of quality service
(a) Services like police, land administration, judiciary (lower
courts), municipal services and income tax have been found
to be the key problem areas by the Transparency International
India. There is a need to train the personnel working in
these services about the importance of providing hassle free
services to the citizens. They should be specially trained to
be citizen-friendly. Personnel working in these departments
must be provided with reasonable housing and transportation
facilities including empowerment in their task. They should
become accountable for the services to be provided to the
citizens and also be penalized for wrong decision. We can
also consider training the personnel at the grass root level
in foreign countries so that they can get a first hand feel of
how these services are being provided in different countries.
These measures will improve the quality of services being
provided to the citizens and the perception about these
departments. Bureaucrats should become facilitators rather
152 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
(b) The following are the components that influence transparent
society: Corruption detection, fast police action, court
proceedings with minimal adjournments, fast judgments and
right to appeal restricted to a minimum level and also there
must be provision for punishing the biased allegation bringing
the accountability into the system. All these processes should
be completed within a prescribed timeframe and all the
pending cases in the court particularly pertaining to corruption
should be cleared in a time-bound manner using a special
Conscience is the light of the Soul that burns within the chambers
of our psychological heart. It is as real as life is. It raises the voice in
protest whenever anything is thought of or done contrary to
righteousness. Conscience is a form of truth that has been transferred
through our genetic stock in the form of the knowledge of our own
acts and feelings as right or wrong.
A virtuous and courageous person can alone use the instrument
of conscience. He or she can alone hear the inner voice of the soul
clearly. In a wicked person this faculty is dead. The sensitive nature
of his / her conscience has been destroyed by sin or corruption. Hence
he or she is unable to discriminate right from wrong. Those who are
leading organizations, business enterprises, institutions and governments
should develop this virtue of the ability to use their own conscience.
This wisdom of using the clean conscience will enable them to enjoy
the freedom and remove their anxiety and worries. In this connection,
I would like to recall the hymn that I have heard in a spiritual centre.
It reads as follows:
Where there is righteousness in the heart,
There is beauty in the character.
When there is beauty in the character,
There is harmony in the home.
When there is harmony in the home,
There is order in the nation.
When there is order in the nation,
There is peace in the world.
It is a beautiful connectivity between heart, character, home, nation
and the world. In a society we have to build righteousness among all
its constituents. For the society as a whole to be righteous we need
creation of righteousness in family, righteousness in education,
righteousness in service, righteousness in career, righteousness in
business and industry, righteousness in civil administration,
righteousness in politics, righteousness in government, righteousness
in law and order, and righteousness injustice.
Friends, the report of Transparency International India indicates
the level of missing transparency in various transactions. I have
answered how we can evolve an enlightened citizen from a child to
grown-up and an organisation, who will eventually be an instrument
My best wishes for success in your deliberations in the mission
of helping the society to have good citizens.
Tourism Industry - Prospect for
J AM HAPPY to participate in the inauguration of Seminar on Tourism
organized by the Gujarat State Government. My greetings to the
organizers, tourist operators, government functionaries, infrastructure
developers other participants and distinguished guests.
In India we celebrate a number of festivals. This is our cultural
tradition. Maharashtra celebrates Ganesh Chaturthi, Bengal, Karnataka
and Gujarat celebrates the Navarathri, Kerala celebrates Onam, Tamil
Nadu celebrates Pongal, Andhra Pradesh celebrates Ugadi, UP celebrates
Ramanavami and Krishna Ashtami, Kashmir celebrates Urs (or Ziarats),
Navroz etc. These are some of the examples. Each state and region
has some unique festival which is popular among the people. Celebration
of these festivals is followed by a number of cultural events which
attracts the attention of all the people, especially the Navrathri
celebrations in Gujarat is accompanied by a carnival of nine nights
involving garba folk dance with devotion and colour. This is celebrated
at the best time of the year. Along with the dance the festival involves
music, colourful costumes and is participated by all sections of the
society. There are large number of Gujaratis staying in different parts
of the world. I am sure the diaspora would definitely like to visit
their home state during this festival season.
I would like to share with you my recent experience, when I visited
Tanzania and South Africa. I started from New Delhi on 11th September
2004 and flew to Dar-es-salam, capital of Tanzania via Mumbai. When
I crossed Mumbai, I just saw, what a beautiful scene, the waves of
Indian Ocean hitting the shores of Mumbai. After five hours of flight
from our soil, I reached Dar-es-salam. Again from air, I could see the
waves of same Indian Ocean embracing Dar-es-salam. I could see Indian
Ocean unifying both the countries. This was further reinforced, when
Address at the inauguration of the Seminar on Tourism, Ahmedabad, 15 October 2005
158 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
I went to Zanzibar Island. I saw in their museum, a multi-sails boat
which was used by our ancestors from Gujarat who were first to arrive
in Zanzibar and enriching that Island. Their arrival is mentioned in the
Zanzibar records. When I met the Zanzibar citizens, I found in them a
mini Gujarat, what a beautiful meet it was ! I had a similar beautiful
experience in Dar-es-Salaam also.
When I think of 20 million people of Indian origin spread in various
countries of our planet, I am reminded of a poem in Tamil epic
Purananooru composed three thousand year ago.
v'iuiT jlub ag[(#|r turr j0ub
It means, "All places are our native places and all people our
relatives". This is deeply ingrained in the social and political life of
India for thousands of years. The message, I would like to convey is
that the tourism is multi-dimensional.
With vast civilisational heritage of the country, from the Himalayas
to Kanyakumari, J&K, Central India, North Eastern states, Bihar,
Western States, the large coastal line, Andaman Nicobar and Lakshadeep
Islands have a lot to attract the tourists. The major tourist attraction
could be spiritual tourism, medical tourism, eco-tourism and the festival
tourism. After my visit to almost all the regions of the country, I have
realized that the tourism industry has a tremendous potential for wealth
generation and should operate as a mission with higher targets. To
succeed in this mission the infrastructural requirements are very essential
and are to be improved. Thrust is required to be given for the inland
water navigation, hotels, communication and tourist promotion. If we
promote sustainable tourism, it can definitely become India's core
competence. These mission areas need action and will provide the
multiplier effect and give the necessary momentum to all sectors of the
I was analyzing the market share of tourism industry in different
countries. France tops the list with a share of 11%, followed by 7.4% in
Spain, 6% in USA, 5.7% in Italy, 5.2% in China, 3.4% in UK 2.9% in
Canada, 2.8% in Mexico and 2.6% in Austria and Germany each.
Surprisingly we do not figure in the list of top 30 countries. What is
required by a modem tourist is good and comfortable travel conditions,
clean reasonable accommodation, and healthy environment, friendliness
of the tour operators, vendors, societal harmony and his safety. Last
year when I was in Dubai, I met the Ruler of Dubai. He said that Dubai
is planning to increase the tourist arrival by five times. Once this decision
was taken I found, that the aviation minister was planning for a new
airport and also new types of aircraft needed for attracting the tourists.
The surface transport minister was planning a number of additional
lanes required in the highways. The works ministry was planning for
increase in the hotel accommodation for accommodating the tourists
without disappointment. The health ministry had a road map for waste
management, additional clean water need. This was the type of integrated
response that I found in the whole government to fulfill the national
objective. We have to take the message coming out of this experience
and plan for the multiple requirements simultaneously for promoting
tourism in our country.
The status of environmental cleanliness is one of the indicators of
development of a nation. As a nation, we have to keep our environment
clean and tidy. This is essential for better health conditions of all the
citizens and also for presenting a wholesome and aesthetic atmosphere
for us and also the tourists visiting our country. It is essential that we
keep all our places of worship and rivers clean and tidy to preserve
their innate divinity. Each one of the States may promulgate appropriate
local laws for promoting harmonious environment in their regions. This
will be the first step needed to promote tourism in our country. Here I
would like to share with you the experience of Kali-Bein River in Punjab
The place where Gurunanak Dev is said to have received
enlightenment and which had over the centuries turned literally into a
sewage ridden, weed choked drain, is today flowing clean and proud
due mainly to the efforts of Baba Balbir Singh Seechewal in partnership
with the Punjab State Government. From the discussions, I understand
that he organized people's participation in stopping the massive flow
of sewage into the Bein and cleaned 160 km long polluted and choked
rivulet within the last three and a half years by deploying on an average
3000 volunteer workers per day. Today one can feel the flow of fresh
water in this rivulet released from the Tarkina Barrage by the government
160 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
about a year ago. The revival of the rivulet has recharged the water
table as the hand pumps that had became dry for the past 4 decades are
now pumping out water. Baba not only did the cleaning up operation
by clearing Bein from the weeds and hyacinth, but also built bathing
ghats at five places. He also built more than 100 km long kutcha road
on the bank of the rivulet.
While I was thinking how we should solve the problem of
improving the environment of rivers and religious places, I find one of
our enlightened citizens has taken the initiative and demonstrated the
power of ignited individuals to solve societal problem. Let this model
spread in all the places of divine worship and inspire the pilgrims to
participate in the divine task of clean environment in water and air which
will attract large number of tourists into our tourist destination.
"Thousands of local initiatives will definitely make our country an
When the tourist comes to India he would like to realize maximum
value for the duration of his stay which can come only through reliable
and fast travel conditions. Many of our tourist spots are located in
interior areas which involves travel by road. To enable fast travel what
we need is air connectivity to majority of the places. Complimentary
to the air travel we can also plan fast train services like Shatabdi
express. Creation of these facilities will involve infrastructural
development such as airports, railway line and multi lane roads to interior
India. The road connectivity can be linked with the PURA (Providing
Urban Amenities in Rural Areas) programme. In addition to this we
can also think in terms of inland waterways which can attract certain
class of people. This mission has to be accomplished through
Many of our cities do not have continuous availability of power.
This gap has to be bridged through use of adding generating capacity
using solar power and power produced out of municipal waste. I should
also point out that actions do not stop at increasing generation alone. It
has to be of good quality. No voltage fluctuation or frequency variations
should be there. In addition, transmission and distribution has to be
efficient with low loss. Above all at the consumer end energy efficiency
should be the key word. We generate power for good use and not to be
wasted as useless heat or sound. The lesser we use energy more kind
we are with the environment. Therefore, for each watt used we should
get maximum end use. Providing quality, reliable and uninterrupted
power is essential for providing minimum comforts to our tourists.
Another important infrastructural need is quality clean
accommodation. Private/public sector participation should plan adequate
number of hotel rooms with various amenities at different tourist centers.
The accommodation apart from being central in location should also
provide a good environment to attract the tourists. Communication
facilities in the accommodation should be such that the guests should
feel that he is in touch with the outside world. Recently, during my visit
to South Africa, I found that each room had a e-connectivity through
which the Hotel was in touch with the guests. The guests can also send
messages to any part of the world. Also the hotel must be able to provide
all the information needed by the guests to plan his visits within his
prescribed budget and also available time. In addition the hotel
authorities must ensure safety and security of the guests including their
belongings. It is also essential to provide the type of food which the
tourists normally prefer in their country.
Tourists must be made to feel at home in our country. They
generally come in contact with taxi drivers, airline staff, railway staff,
shopkeepers, tourist guides, hotel staff and the response from these
people becomes a bench mark for the tourists. Hence, it is essential that
all the people whom a normal tourist is likely to come in contact should
be trained in the way they should interact with the tourists. They should
ensure that the tourist get all support and he is made to feel fully at
home. This is a vital requirement for attracting the tourist inflow into
As tourism in India is increasing, people from foreign countries
are coming to India and Indians also love tourism and visit number of
countries. I would suggest, just like spiritual tourism within our country,
we can consider promotion of multi-national spiritual tourism connecting
important Buddhist centers in India, Nepal and Thailand operated by a
Gujarat has many interesting places which can become a good
tourist destination. Some of them are the ancient remains of Indus valley
civilization at Dhola Vira in Kutch district, the desert lands of Kutch,
162 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
the only abode of ancient lion Gir forests, sanctuaries of rare species of
birds and animals, beaches along the sea coast, Lord Krishna's temple
at Dwaraka, Jain Temple at Palitana. I am sure these places can be
definitely converted as exciting tourist spots which will attract both
national and international tourists. The tourist inflow during the
Navarathri season will get enhanced due to the cultural value of variety
of dances presented by the locals.
Dignified human life is characterized by probity in every facet.
Irrespective of one's station in life whether in politics, civil services,
social work or any other one is expected to conduct oneself in a civilized
manner. Everyone is entitled to self-respect, and showing due respect
to others is the only way to earn that self-respect. This is very much
applicable to all the tourists whom we receive. Let us set standards for
ourselves in keeping with our hallowed past and glorious traditions.
All of us must realize the nation is bigger than any individual. With this
thought in mind we should treat each tourist as our personal guest which
in my view is the only way to attract tourists from all parts of the world
to our noble land. Atithi Devo Bhava that is our culture.
Women Empowerment for a
J AM INDEED delighted to address and interact with the women
entrepreneurs of Karnataka organized by the Association of Women
Entrepreneurs of Karnataka. My greetings to all the members of
AWAKE for the good work they are doing for the women community.
I would like to share some of my thoughts with you.
The heart of India lies in its villages, as there are approximately
6,00,000 villages in our country and around 70% of our population
reside in the villages. Hence the villages have to play a crucial role in
bringing about overall development in the country. The next two decades
are very important for India for transforming from a 'developing'
country to a 'developed' nation. The responsible citizens, particularly
women, are all the more important for the nation as their thoughts,
the way of working and value system will lead to fast development
of a good family, good society and ultimately a good nation.
The nation has a vision for the India of 2020 and by that year we
hope that India can join the ranks of developed countries. For this,
we would have to double our present growth rate of Gross Domestic
Product, and to achieve this, five key areas have been identified in
which we need to focus our attention. These areas are:
(1) Education and Health care,
(2) Agriculture and Food Processing,
(3) Information and communication technology,
(4) Infrastructure development, and
(5) Self-sufficiency in areas of critical technologies.
Address at the Association of Women Entrepreneurs of Karnataka, Bangalum, 16
164 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
I have a message for all the women entrepreneurs who are gathered
here today. In all these five areas, which have been listed for focused
attention, the role of women is very clearly interwoven. For example,
in areas of health care, education, agriculture and food processing, it
is the women who provide a major portion of the services, which go
into these sectors. As such, your role in shaping the future destiny of
our country is very very important. You must dream and think about
how to make our nation join the ranks of the developed nations by
To achieve this vision, I would like to share with you some thoughts
on possible missions. For bridging the rural-urban divide and achieving
balanced socio-economic development, our Pradhan Mantriji, as part
of his Independence Day announcements, has declared the Rural
Development Programme called PURA - Provision of Urban Amenities
in Rural Areas. It involves identification of rural clusters with growth
potential and creating four types of connectivities for them -
(i) Road, transportation and power connectivity,
(ii) Electronic connectivity in the form of reliable telecom,
Internet and IT services,
(iii) Knowledge connectivity in the form of good educational
and training institutions, and
(iv) Market connectivity that would enable kisans and others to
get the best prices for their produce.
The Government has decided to implement the PURA strategy
in 5,000 rural clusters across the country in the next five years. But
the success of this ambitious programme lies in the collaborative efforts
and active participation of all the village leaders at the grassroot levels.
Moreover, a woman with her inherent characteristics such as
compassion, patience, perseverance, honesty, sensitivity to social issues,
constructive approach towards problem solving and hard work, will
be able to play a vital role in realising this mission. Such women,
when empowered through the democratic process, can collectively
I am reminded of Mahakavi Subramaniya Bharatiar, who in 1910
composed the poem envisioning women of India:
This beautiful poem means -
She walks with raised head,
With her eyes looking straight,
She has her principles,
She has a lofty
Don't falter from the chosen path.
She drives ignorance away.
She welcomes the bliss of life
This is the Dharma of emerging woman.
The dream of the poet, I am sure, will become a reality.
The women entrepreneurs can create awareness about PURA
amongst the village community so that they can come forward to
willingly contribute to this development programme. The contribution
could be in the form of -
(a) Promoting and facilitating illiteracy eradication campaigns
(b) Explaining the usefulness of computer education in village
administration for providing transparent governance and
(c) Forming village co-operatives for central procurement,
storage, preservation, processing and marketing the goods
(d) Working for providing better nutrition, sanitation facilities,
safe drinking water and access to reproductive health care
for healthy families and communities.
166 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
(e) Fighting against the social evils such as dowry, female
foeticide, child marriage, child labour, domestic violence,
and ill-treatment and harassment of the socially backward
(f) Encouraging women to attain economic independence through
formation of Self Help Groups with the help of micro-credit
and organising various skill training programmes.
(g) Facilitating the conservation of energy through effective
utilization of solar power, recyling the waste for energy
generation and management of water through rainwater
When a child is empowered by the parents at various phases of
growth, the child gets transformed into a responsible citizen. When a
teacher is empowered with knowledge and experience, good young
human beings with value systems emerge. When an individual or a
team is empowered with technology, transformation to higher potential
for achievement is assured. When a leader of any village empowers
his or her people, leaders are bom who can change the nation in multiple
areas. When women are empowered, society with stability gets assured.
When the political leaders of the nation empower the people through
visionary policies, the prosperity of the nation is certain. When religions
are empowered and become spiritual force, peace and happiness will
blossom in people's heart. Empowerment of various layers of
management stmcture is indeed the best instrument to maximize the
performance of a given fund to the developmental tasks. Such an
empowered stage will lead to creation of enlightened citizens with
value system resulting in prosperity of the nation.
As per the Census of 2001, women account for 48.3% of our
total population. Many agencies, both Government and private, are
taking initiatives in the areas of training and capacity building,
employment and income generation, welfare and gender sensitization
with the ultimate objective of empowering women both economically
and socially for making them equal partners in development. We had
declared the year 2001 as 'Women's Empowerment Year' and efforts
were made at various levels in many sectors for mainstreaming gender
perspectives into all laws, policies, programmes, regulations and
budgeting allocations of the Government.
The process for transforming India into a developed nation has
already commenced. All of you are working towards this cause in
your own way. We find many individual success stories of women
for income generation in the fields of agriculture, agro-processing,
cottage industry, handicrafts, sericulture, herbal farming etc. Women
are also leading movements against social evils with certain amount
of success. Now there is a need to make concerted efforts as a nation
to work persistently towards the singular goal of making India a
developed nation by the year 2020.
For this, I suggest small groups of interested women entrepreneurs
and public leaders from other States to have a workshop in the
Entrepreneur Development Institute to see for themselves what can
be achieved by way of gender empowerment through efforts like the
one made by AWAKE. I am sure this would enlighten women
entrepreneurs of other States as well and encourage them to take on
efforts like the one which we have seen here.
Keeping the Environment Clean
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of India Country-
level Development Marketplace organized by the World Bank.
My interest to participate in this meet arises from the focus of the
programme towards sustainable rural development in India.
What am I doing in this function organized by the World Bank?
That too on a beautiful Monday evening? I am here to share with you
an important message. A message that will make the partnership between
the World Bank and countries like India lead to a path of win-win
relationship. While we all appreciate your efforts of selecting and
funding 20 innovative projects, let us spend a minute to see how we
can benefit from the experience. The experiences of such small but
important projects can be integrated and scaled up, so that it will give
certain inputs to the overall mission of India as presented in my recent
Parliament address to bring prosperity to the rural India. This definitely
has a tremendous scope for the World Bank to become a partner in
this national endeavour. There is an old Indian saying that "Only a
burning candle can light another". Let the candle of knowledge that
you light from your experience here, be propagated to the rest of the
needy world, so that we would soon witness a prosperous borderless
World Bank has taken an important initiative in calling for
proposals from over 1500 Non-Government Organisations in India
for rural development programmes, which I am sure will have an
integrating effort and may pave the way in choices of multiple routes
towards rural development. I congratulate the organizers for promoting
this programme. My greetings to all the participants who have submitted
the proposals, award winners, juries, experts and distinguished guests.
Address at the inauguration of India Country Level Development Market Place, New
Delhi, 21 June 2004
When I was going through the 50 short-listed proposals, I found
that each one of these tiny but important projects addresses a specific
issue and these are widely spread across the nation. If the social
entrepreneurs with the participation of panchayat and local
administration successfully demonstrate these projects then they have
the potential of being assembled as components of a holistic project
in a village cluster.
The World Bank efforts of inviting the proposals, systematic
screening and selection through eminent juries, are noteworthy. The
twenty selected proposals by the World Bank will complement the
integrated rural development programme of the government. Hopefully
these twenty projects may turn out to be demonstrative of innovative
ideas, which can be replicated elsewhere.
Now I would like to share with you some recent case studies to
illustrate how these individual sectoral innovations could lead to an
integrated rural development model.
Recently I had visited Periyar Maniammai College of Technology
for women and inaugurated a project called PURA (Providing Urban
amenities in Rural Areas) Complex. Over 60 villages near Vallam,
Thanjavur district of Tamil Nadu, have been transformed as a PURA
Cluster. It has a ring road and interconnecting roads covering major
villages along with bus transport system. They have provided internet
kiosks through wireless connectivity for many of the villages. Periyar
Maniammai hospitals and family welfare centres along with the mobile
cancer diagnostic clinic provides health care to the population of the
rural complex. Campus provides education from kindergarten to
postgraduation. In addition, they are providing knowledge connectivity
through awareness and training programmes for use of organic manure
(vermi compost), Yoga and Siddha-based formulations, renewable
energy, rain water harvesting and general health. Women are empowered
through Self-Help Groups, entrepreneurship development programmes
including training programmes for skill development and micro business
activities. Organizers of Periyar PURA have established so far 525
self-reliant Self Help Groups, which provide employment for 8000
rural women through products for which technologies have been
170 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
transferred. They are self-sufficient in energy through solar power
and bio-mass gasifier plants. Towards economic development they
have integrated farms, energy plantation, aquaculture, livestock farms
and dry land horticulture. They have innovative water management
schemes for irrigation. Provision of training to the village community
in printing technologies, refrigeration and air conditioning, hardware
training, Desk Top Publishing (DTP), plumbing, electrical wiring,
welding/fabrication, bakery and construction technology has created
job opportunities to the villagers. The members of the villages are
fruitfully employed and they are producing value added products. A
transformation has taken place keeping our civilizational heritage intact
and converted the rural settings into a livable habitat. I have witnessed
the progress of this project.
BAIF (Bharat Agro Industries Foundation, Pune) has organized
a tribal rehabilitation programme for sustainable livelihood. The tribal
population in Vansda (Navsari district) and Dharampur (Valsad di strict)
blocks of Gujarat were migrating to nearby cities with their families
in search of wages as their land holdings were very small and the
crop productivity was low. Migration deprived the children of
educational and health facilities, while both men and women took to
drinking of alcohol. These families were motivated to stay back on
their own lands and take up cultivation of fruit bearing trees as a
measure of generating gainful employment. BAIF provided wages to
the families in the formative stages for working on their own lands,
as they had no other source of income. They were enabled to grow
good quality grafted plants of mango and cashew and also provided
with manure and fertilizers. In return, BAIF took a commitment from
the families that they would work hard and abstain from alcohol and
Simultaneously, the men and women were organized into small
Self Help Groups to meet every week and discuss various actions to
be initiated under this programme. Watershed development programme
was introduced to harvest the rainwater near the fruit gardens (known
as Wadi in Gujarat) for providing support irrigation. As sophisticated
drip irrigation system was not manageable due to lack of electricity
and high cost, pitcher irrigation was promoted. After establishing the
fruit trees, the farmers were advised to cultivate various food crops.
As the fruit trees started yielding after 3-4 years, other income generation
activities such as establishment of fruit nursery, cultivation of vegetables
and herbal medicines, sericulture, mushroom production, masonry
and carpentry were promoted to generate additional income. Thus,
they attained food security right from the first year while the trees
started growing and bearing fruits from the third or fourth year,
generating a surplus of Rs. 20,000-25,000 per family.
It is the tribal women who were more interested in attending to
the field activities and nurturing the orchards. Drudgery reduction
and health care were also promoted and the women were able to utilize
the time saved for productive work. Today, they have formulated their
own co-operatives for processing and marketing of their cashew and
mango products and for this advance facility centres have been
established for each zone.
This programme has benefited over 50,000 tribal families in
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Rajasthan. As the orchard is
able to give them substantial income, they have stopped migrating to
the cities. These tribals who have established fruit orchards on their
degraded lands have not only come out of poverty, but also protected
the neighbouring forest area and demonstrated how poverty eradication
can be linked with eco-system improvement. Today, this programme
has emerged as a unique tribal development model in the country.
BAIF is also engaged in livestock development for promoting
animal husbandry on a massive scale covering over 20,000 villages
in 9 States. Over the last 35 years, they have helped over 7-8 lakh
families to come out of poverty. Under this programme, BAIF provides
breeding and advisory services to produce superior quality cattle. A
family maintaining 2-3 crossbred cows, earns Rs. 18,000-20,000 per
year. This is the result of use of appropriate technologies and ambient
Project Siruthuli is an initiative started by Coimbatoreans for
Coimbatoreans. This ecological project aims to bring back the glory
of Coimbatore and its rich heritage. The project is represented by
172 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
people from all walks of life and professionally organized. The primary
focus is on large scale rain water harvesting, afforestation, sewage/
waste water treatment and solid waste management. They have already
standardized five of the nine primary tanks in Coimbatore for large
scale rainwater harvesting. Over 600 saplings have been planted on
the bunds of the desilted tanks and are being maintained. They are
moving towards a target of planting 15 lakh trees by the end of 2005.
The comprehensive study has indicated outlet of the city sewage as
10 million litres per day. A pilot plant is being taken up for sewage
treatment to treat one million litres per day. The treated water will be
sold to the agriculturists and industrialists as a revenue earning measure.
The garbage and debris to the extent of over 26,000 cubic metres in
one of the city's largest tanks have been removed. These are the major
achievements for developing a growing city.
The status of environmental cleanliness is one of the indicators
of the development of a nation. As a nation, we have to keep our
environment clean and tidy including all our places of worship and
rivers. I am delighted to learn the Kali Bein rivulet, the place where
Gurunanak Dev is said to have received enlightenment and which
had over the centuries turned literally into a sewage-ridden, weed
choked drain, is today flowing clean and proud, mainly due to the
efforts of Baba Balbir Singh Seechewal in partnership with the Punjab
State Government. From the discussions, I understand that he organized
people's participation in stopping the massive flow of sewage into
the Bein and cleaned 160 km long polluted and choked rivulet within
the last three and a half years by deploying on an average per day
3000 devotees of the Gurudwara who have become volunteer workers
for the mission. Today one can feel the flow of fresh water in this
rivulet released from the Tarkina Barrage by the government about a
year ago. The revival of the rivulet has recharged the water table as
the hand pumps that had become dry for the past four decades are
now pumping out water. Baba with the volunteers, not only did the
cleaning up operation by clearing Bein from the weeds and hyacinth,
but also built bathing ghats at five places. He also built more than
100 km long kutcha road on the bank of the rivulet.
Elango, a village Panchayat President, a Chemical Engineer, and
a native of the village, pledged to develop Kuthampakkam. He decided
to contribute for the village where he lived. In 1990, he gave up his
job and started living in the village. Observing the poor living conditions
of the people, Elango decided it was his first aim to retrieve people
from illicit distillation activity. He then tried persuading them to take
up alternative employment, planning some short term jobs for them,
orientation programmes and a few more events, but all his efforts
were unsuccessful. The people did not accept Elango, nor were they
ready to recognize his efforts to improve their lives. All they wanted
was a sustainable income. He came to the firm belief that organizing
community employment for the people on a long-term basis was the
only way to stop them from illicit distillation. He realized that neither
preaching nor short-term benefits would attract them; only a steady
income would. Elango was able to provide his villagers with sustainable
employment through government schemes like the 'Namakku namae'
project. "Under that project, he laid concrete roads with the members
of village by dividing them into different groups and the project was
handed over to them. One group bought material and another distributed
it, while a third worked. Now the village has concrete roads for a
stretch of more than four kms, without any compromise on quality.
The project has not only provided alternative employment but also
quality roads. Also about 900 families of Kuthampakkam under the
low cost housing project have been transformed into an organized
community with a harmonious eco-friendly lifestyle. Social tensions
have disappeared. Every one in the village engages himself/herself
in a constructive activity irrespective of age, gender or caste.
During my visits to various rural areas and interaction with people
in different parts of the country, I come across a few unsung heroes
appearing in the region who have done unique work for the village
development. Some examples are agro forestry, self-help groups, and
cultivation of bio-plants, increasing productivity of seed cotton,
development of orchards, animal husbandry, tripling the yield of wheat
and vermi-compost organic manure. A mechanism has to be evolved
to spot the performance and build development around them. World
Bank in partnership with Indian agencies can facilitate a special project
174 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
to conduct the survey of performers in different regions in the country
and publish a directory. This information will be very useful to the
Planning Commission, World Bank constituents, NGOs and State/
So far, I have discussed with you some of the successful rural
development initiatives undertaken by the NGO and individuals, apart
from the Central and state governments' rural development programmes.
Now I would like to discuss what is needed at this juncture. Nearly
700 million people of India live in the rural areas in 600,000 villages.
Rural prosperity depends upon building up both ''content" and
"connectivity" simultaneously. Connectivity of village complexes
providing economic opportunities to all segments of people is an urgent
need to empower the rural sector. The essential needs of the villages
today are water, power, road, sanitation, health care, education,
transportation, communication and other services needed for sustainable
entrepreneurship and quality of life.
The integrated methods, which will bring prosperity to rural India
are: the physical connectivity of the village clusters through quality
roads and transport; electronic connectivity through tele-communication
with high bandwidth fibre optic cables reaching the rural areas from
urban cities and through internet kiosks; knowledge connectivity through
education, vocational training for farmers, artisans and craftsmen and
entrepreneurship programmes; and economic connectivity through
starting of enterprises with the help of banks, micro credits and marketing
The next two decades is a period of accelerated economic
development for our country. Science and technology and economic
planning has to contribute continuously for undertaking various
missions. With these tasks before us, "What can I do for the prosperity
of 700 million people living in six hundred thousand villages", should
echo in the heart of every Indian scientist, technologist, economist
and planner. And also the international organization definitely can
use the experiences that will be gained from PURA, in other parts of
the world since development is progressing in multiple ambient
conditions. I am happy to see that the projects selected also address
the connectivity dimensions such as rural finance, energy,
communication, e-services etc. A large number of projects fall in the
category of knowledge connectivity. It would be appropriate as a next
step of development financing that the World Bank can become partner
in enabling the NGOs and corporate sector for undertaking development
of viable clusters of villages for their sustainable development in a
big way. The outlay of this participative endeavour would involve 20
to 40 million dollars for each cluster. Such investment, besides providing
urban amenities in rural areas, will also become a sustainable business
proposition. World Bank is not only a bank dealing with money, but
also a bank that has become a creator and guardian of Knowledge
Capital. This knowledge capital, a concept of banking in knowledge
is the most ideal path for the world that is entering into the knowledge
era. I am sure that whatever the World Bank gains by the experiments
in India, will become a model for other countries to follow. This will
make both the Bank and India feel satisfied. The banking sector in
India and the postal department have a very strong presence in the
rural India. They should work closely with the World Bank to propagate
and democratize the knowledge and engage themselves in funding
rural projects that would act as catalysts to lift the rural poor to afford
and get the urban amenities without having to migrate to the urban
India. My sincere request to the World Bank and the organizers of
this event is for them to invest more time and efforts in making sure
that the knowledge that the banks have accumulated should reach
every needy Indian, particularly those in the rural areas. The Rural
India should go next time to the bank not to borrow money but to
My greetings to all World Bank authorities and all the participants
and the finalists of the village development programme.
Banking Sector - Reinforcing the
Economy of the Nation
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the Bankers' Conference 2004
hosted by Punjab National Bank and the Indian Banks' Association.
My greetings to the organizers, senior bankers, economists, policy
makers, academicians, government functionaries and distinguished
In the Indian history, very rarely have we come across a situation,
all at a time, an ascending economic trajectory, continuously rising
foreign exchange reserve, global recognition of technological
competence, energy of 540 million youth, umbilical connectivities
of 20 million people of Indian origin in various parts of the planet,
and the interest shown by many developed countries to invest in our
engineers and scientists including setting up of new R&D centres.
Also the national "Common Minimum Programme" of the Government
has six basic principles. Three out of them emphasize on economic
development by ensuring growth rate of 7% to 8% annually, enhancing
the welfare of the farmers and workers and unleashing the creativity
of the entrepreneurs, business persons, scientists, engineers and other
productive forces of the society.
Now we have an important mission, the mission of lifting the
economic status of 260 million people, who are below the poverty
line. I understand that the total annual credit performance of our banks
is nearly Rs. 800,000 crore ($ 180 billion). In this environment, indeed
Bankers have a mission of great challenge. I am sure the economic
experts assembled here will be discussing the means of removing the
poverty of 260 million people in a time bound manner. Our mission
Address at the Bankers' Conference 2004, New Delhi, 10 November 2004
is: Transforming India into a prosperous, happy, peaceful and safe
nation, as our youth dream to have. Let me share with you a few
It is well understood that sound fiscal and monetary policies, a
trusted and efficient legal system, a stable set-up of democratic
institutions and progress on social conditions contribute greatly to an
economically healthy nation. Wealth is actually created at the micro
economic level of the economy rooted in the sophistication of corporate
and entrepreneurs as well as in quality of competitive micro economic
In this connection, I was studying the development patterns and
the dynamics of connectivity between nations, especially in trade and
business. As you all know the world has few developed countries
and many developing countries. What is the dynamics between them
and what connects them? Developed country has to market its products
in a competitive way to different countries to remain as developed
country. The developing country to get transformed into developed
country too has to market its products to other countries in a competitive
way. Competitiveness is the common factor between the two types
of nations. Competitiveness has three dimensions: quality of the product,
cost effectiveness and just in time in the market. Indeed this dynamics
of competitiveness in marketing of products by developing and
developed countries is called the "law of development". Hence Indian
products whether software or hardware has to compete within the
country and in international markets.
In this context, banking sector has a tremendous role in reinforcing
the economy of the nation, by servicing the micro economic needs of
all the three sectors of the economy - agriculture, manufacturing and
services, at the centres of action in the country.
The financial services industry has been in the vanguard in the
development phase in all the countries. The proactive approach adopted
by many banks has led to phenomenal growth of the country. The
days of development financial institutions seem to be over. The current
fashion is the Universal Bank. Even the redoubtable IDBI has converted
178 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
itself into a Universal Bank shedding the robe of a pure development
financial institution. The development finance responsibility with its
inherent risks is squarely and fully on the banking sector. It is in this
background I wish the bankers to play a positive role to assist the
country to march towards development faster.
In India we have the experience of providing venture capital to a
number of entrepreneurs. Of course a few of them succeeded also. In
the present economic situation, it is essential the venture capital business
has to increase in magnitude, particularly with hassle free procedures.
I have come across a European experience of a physics graduate turning
into 100 million dollar exclusive venture capital banker and leading
to establishment of a 10 billion dollar company. The chief executive
of that company met me two days back with a certain dream for India.
Recently the Department of Science and Technology (DST) has
started Technology Business Incubator (TBI) programme in a number
of engineering colleges in the country to bring up young and innovative
techno entrepreneurs to utilize the infrastructure and knowledge of
academy to develop new products - software and hardware and establish
design and process know-how for setting up a product line. The bankers
have to scout for prospective entrepreneurs coming out of such
programmes and provide venture capital to scale up and lead to quantity
production. Actually in this situation there are certain risks. But in
the history of great industrial development, risks always accompany
success. If only you take such risks, you can reap the benefit of generating
billion dollar company. Are you ready?
To achieve the vision of developed India, we have to
simultaneously progress in five areas where India has core competence
for integrated action: (1) Agriculture and food processing, (2) Education
and health care, (3) Information and communication technology,
(4) Infrastructure including electric power, networking of rivers,
Providing Urban amenities in Rural Areas (PURA), and (5) Self reliance
in identified critical technologies. These five areas are closely inter
related and if progressed in a mission mode will lead to food security,
economic prosperity, social welfare and national security.
The number of PUR A units for the whole country is estimated
to be 7000. This envisages integrated connectivities to bring prosperity
to rural India. These are - physical connectivity of the village clusters
through quality roads and transport; electronic connectivity through
tele-communication with high bandwidth fibre optic cables reaching
the rural areas from urban cities and through Internet kiosks; and
knowledge connectivity through education, vocational training for
farmers, artisans and craftsmen and entrepreneurship programmes.
These three connectivities will lead to economic connectivity through
starting of enterprises with the help of banks, micro credits and marketing
Each PUR A cluster will connect about 20 villages depending
upon the region and population and will cost about Rs.100 crores.
After initial short-term employment during construction etc., we have
to plan for initiating actions for providing regular employment and
self-employment opportunities in nationally competitive small
enterprises in agro processing, manufacturing and services sectors
for about 3,000 people. If the industrial/business parks are marketed
well, they can generate employment opportunities in support sector
for about 10,000 people. This will provide sustainable economy for
the rural sector. In this national mission, bankers can promote
entrepreneurship in the rural areas. This will lead to the removal of
A large number of banks have entrepreneurial development
programmes. Banks have also been funding Small Scale Industries
of different types in various regions. The small scale industrialist is a
promising candidate for becoming the chief executive for managing
the PUR A complexes in an integrated way. PURA enterprises can
also undertake management of schools, health care units, vocational
training centres, chilling plants, silos and building a market, banking
system and the regional business or industrial units. A new mission
mode management style has to emerge for PURA enterprises. It should
not be looking for protective legislations to support them. Rather they
should be efficient to compete with others. This new PURA enterprise
needs partnership from the bank, from the Government and also from
the private entrepreneurs. Banks can train the entrepreneurs for managing
180 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
the PURA in their training centres and also provide them loans for
creating and running PURAs as a business proposition.
In April 2004, a national meet on nano technology and its
application was organized at Rashtrapati Bhavan. The present world
market for nano materials, nano tools, nano devices and nano
biotechnology put together is over hundred billion dollars. It has been
noticed that the fastest growing area among these is nano-biotechnology.
Health sector and industrial applications are priority areas for India.
In this connection, I happened to study the Nano-technology Market
and Company Report "Finding Hidden Pearls" supported by Deutsche
Bank. The study provides the overview for the industrialists and the
entrepreneurs to venture into the developing economy in a right path.
It gives the following:
(a) an up-to-date report on nano-technology companies and
products that are already in the nano-technology market or
will appear in the market soon.
(b) identifies the key challenges and the time frame for future
nano-technology products through expert interviews.
(c) provides realistic market figures based on existing nano
technology products for various applications.
This report provides valuable inputs to venture capitalists, financial
and economic analysts, consultants, marketing managers, R & D
managers, researchers and vendors involved in nano-technology
products. What I would like to emphasize here is that the initiative
for the preparation of the report has emerged from the banking
community. This shows how the banking community is forward looking
and preparing the policy makers, scientists, researchers, industrialists
and entrepreneurs to undertake different jobs connected with nano
technology products and services, the nano-technology market which
is likely to reach $ 1-2 trillion dollars by 2015 or more than 10% of
the total global industrial output. I would suggest to Indian banking
community to undertake such forward looking projects relevant to
Indian environment in order to meet the international demand and
come out with comprehensive reports and business proposals which
will provide different segments of society a clear direction for
channelising their effort and investment leading to national prosperity.
This indeed is a proactive action of the bankers.
Now I would like to discuss some of the large-scale employment
and wealth generating avenues in the rural sector. These are not mere
cottage industries but can become business of the size of thousands
of crores of rupees.
(a) Jatropha Biofuel: Government has decided to permit mixing
of 10% bio-fuel with diesel. This has opened up new
opportunities for employment and wealth generation. We
have nearly 63 million hectares of wasteland available in
the country, out of which 33 million hectares of wasteland
have been allotted for tree plantation. Certain multi-purpose
trees such as Jatropha can grow well in wasteland with very
little input. Once grown the crop has fifty years of life. Fruiting
can take place in this plant in less than two years. It yields
oil seeds up to five tonnes per hectare per year and produces
two tonnes of bio-diesel. Presently, the cost of bio-diesel
through the plant is approximately Rs. 17 to Rs. 19 per litre
which can be substantially reduced through choice of right
size of the plant and using high yield variety plantation.
Bio-diesel plants grown in 11 million hectares of land can
yield a revenue of approximately Rs. 20,000 crore a year
and provide employment to over 12 million people both for
plantation and running of the extraction plants. This is a
sustainable development process leading to large scale
employment of rural manpower. Also, it will reduce the
foreign exchange outflow paid for importing crude oil, the
cost of which is continuously rising in the international market.
Moreover, use of bio-diesel is carbon monoxide emission
free. This oil can also be used for soap and candle industries.
De-oiled cake is a raw material for composting. Also Jatropha
plantation provides a good environment for honey production.
We should absorb the best of technologies available
worldwide and start commercial operation soon, instead of
182 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
staying at pilot plant levels. I would request the banking
community assembled here to take the initiative, generate
detailed project report in collaboration with technical agencies
such as The Energy and Research Institute (TERI) on this
project and promote entrepreneurs with financial support
from the banks in rural areas who can undertake the plantation
and commissioning of extraction plants leading to production
of cost-effective bio-fuel. Can there be a better project than
this for coherent development of our rural sector?
(b) Rural Lighting: Recently, I received a E-mail from Chintapalli
Gramam, Nalgonda District of Andhra Pradesh about the
implementation of LED lighting through solar power in a
remote village inhabited by Lambada tribes. The village
has a population 142 people residing in thirty houses. The
one time cost of providing LED lighting for all the houses
including wiring and solar charging system for the battery
is around Rs. 65,000. On an average, the cost of providing
electricity per house works out to Rs. 2200. This is definitely
much cheaper than the cost of providing electricity to the
village through a power line running into number of kilometres
costing many lakhs of rupees. Particularly in remote areas
and hilly region electricity could not be reached due to high
initial cost of installation. Presently I am told electric lines
have not reached over one lakh villages in our country. LED
power system is a self-contained system in which the energy
cost is virtually free since solar energy is used to charge the
batteries. I would recommend the banking community to
study this project for converting it as a business proposition,
which can be taken by rural enterprises for implementation
in different sectors. Once successful this technology can
find utility in many parts of the world where similar situation
exists. This has tremendous business potential.
(c) Electricity Generation through Municipal Waste: Increased
urbanization has led to a serious problem of accumulation
of municipal solid waste. Efficient and environmentally clean
disposal of garbage has always been a major technological
challenge. While being a threat to the environment, mounting
garbage is also a rich source of energy. The potential for
converting this waste into useable energy, which will eliminate
a major source of urban pollution, was realized by one of
our innovative organizations - Technology Information
Forecasting and Assessment Council of DST which helped
in developing a completely indigenous solution for the
processing of waste into a source of fuel. This fuel could,
in turn, be used for generation of electricity through mini
plants. Two entrepreneurs in Andhra Pradesh adopted the
technology with refinement and established two independent
plants in Hyderabad and Vijayawada generating over 12
megawatts of electricity which is being supplied to the State
Grid. India needs thousands of mini power plants using
municipal waste. Banking sector can provide the thrust for
promoting creation of such power plants in major
municipalities as a first step in collaboration with corporate
houses and non-government organizations.
These are some of the examples of rural development projects
which can be promoted by the banking community with the active
participation of corporate houses and entrepreneurs for upliftment of
the 700 million people living in our villages. There are similar
possibilities in water, habitat, infrastructure, ICT, agriculture and many
more. Once the banks get involved in all these sectors in a proactive
manner, I am sure the path to development will be much smoother
and our realization of development will be much faster.
An education loan scheme has been in operation for a long time;
since April 2001 loans up to Rs.7.5 lakhs and Rs. 15 lakhs are available
for professional courses within the country and abroad, respectively.
The requirement of collateral was dispensed with for loans up to Rs.4
lakh. Budget speech of the Finance Minister indicated that commercial
banks have now agreed to waive the need for collateral for loans up
to Rs.7.5 lakh, if a satisfactory guarantee is provided on behalf of the
student. Thus, no student admitted to any professional course, including
courses in IITs, IIMs, Engineering, Management and Medical colleges,
will be deprived of the opportunity to study because of lack of funds.
184 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
In spite of this, I am receiving a number of e-mails stating that Banks
are not providing the loans for professional education, even though
they satisfy the required criteria. I would request the banking community
to examine the merits of these observations and make appropriate
corrections to the system. In addition to the above, another problem
which I find is that there is no mechanism for funding other courses
apart from professional courses which is also required for the holistic
development of our nation. I would request the banking community
assembled here to find a suitable mechanism for nurturing economically
weaker section of our youth through financial support for pursuing
higher education in all disciplines.
I understand there are 53,000 bank branches spread all over the
country. I would recommend at least 10% of these branches namely
5,300 to adopt at least one primary and one secondary school each in
their respective region of operation for improving the infrastructure
and promoting quality education.
I would recommend the following six missions for the banking
sector for immediate implementation:
(a) Increase the agriculture and agro processing credit to
Rs. 200,000 crore from the existing Rs. 90,000 crore within
the next three years. This will include advances for setting
up of PURA complexes and small enterprises in PURA
(b) Create and nurture five rural development projects similar
to bio-fuel project which can be applicable for a large number
of villages leading to employment generation through
enterprises for at least ten million youth.
(c) Innovatively fund the 300,000 sick SSI units so that latest
technology can be infused and they can overcome the present
problems and become profitable ventures within the next
(d) Provide concessional interest rate funding for creation of
corporate hospitals which can provide networked health care
for the rural community through medical insurance on
Yeshaswini model followed by Karnataka and also attract
medical tourists for cost-effective treatment through our
(e) Participate in infrastructural development including provision
of 100 million quality dwelling units with basic infrastructure
in the rural areas in association with state urban development
(f) Allocate at least Rs. 10,000 crore for providing venture capital
to innovative scientists and technologists in all the three
sectors, commencing from the next financial year, including
Information and Communication Technology-based
knowledge products and Software Development and Software
In addition to the above missions, I have a suggestion. As you
are aware, we have a growing foreign exchange reserve of about 120
billion dollars. The bankers can have a mission: how to invest and
multiply a portion of FE reserve, if it is made available for investing
in relatively higher yield enterprises.
Friends, so far I have discussed the dynamics of banking in relation
to national development. In India we have two great resources -
natural and human resources. Fortunately we have food security, certain
industrial base and high-tech institutions. I believe what is needed
today is proactive partnership of bankers in the national development
missions. One of the very important ingredients for success of the
vision of transforming India into a developed nation by 2020 is the
evolution of creative leaders. Who is that creative leader? What are
the qualities of a creative leader? The creative leadership is exercising
the task to change the traditional role from commander to coach, manager
to mentor, from director to delegator and from one who demands
respect to one who facilitates self-respect. The higher the proportion
of creative leaders in the banking sector, the higher the potential of
success of vision of developed India.
My best wishes to the whole banking community for success in
your two day deliberations, resulting in positive action plans for the
growth of the banking sector and thereby the national development.
IITF - A Unique Blend of Trade and
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of the 24th
India International Trade Fair - 2004.1 greet the organizers, members
of the Ministry of Commerce & Industry, members of the India Trade
Promotion Organisation, captains of industries, contributors and
participants from various nations for this mega event. I also extend
my greetings to partner country China and focus country Brazil, for
this trade fair. IITF is a unique blend of trade and tradition, and provides
a platform for a wide range of industrial opportunities in various sectors
of the economy by showcasing the nation's technological strength.
This year's Trade Fair has the twin theme of "Agriculture" and
"Information Technology" which are the key drivers of the India's
socio-economic development. I have selected the topic for discussion:
During the last few years a number of developments have taken
place in the agriculture and IT sectors with profound results in improving
the productivity and quality of the products. I would like to share
with you the status of development and focus for the future on the
India is now producing 200 million tonnes of food grains, as a
result of the first green revolution. India has now embarked on the
Second Green Revolution which will enable increase in productivity
and diversification of the agricultural sector. The second green revolution
will have the farmers in focus, farming technology as the friend, food
processing and marketing as partners and the consumers as the angels
Address at the inauguration of 24th India International Trade Fair - 2004, New Delhi,
to be satisfied. From now on to 2020, India will gradually increase
the production to around 400 million tonnes of grains. The increase
in the production will have to be done under the reduced availability
of land from 170 million hectares to 100 million hectares with reduced
water availability. We should also learn to diversify to meet specific
consumer preferences, export markets and also in the interest of
ecological balance. This is to be achieved through information access
to all stakeholders and not with central controls or restriction of
movements of agro products.
The challenges for the scientists and technologies would be in
the areas of development of seeds that would ensure good yield even
under constraints of water and land with ecologically balanced farming.
The challenges for the scientist is indeed a knowledge graduation
from characterization of soil to the matching of the seed with the
composition of the fertilizer, water management and evolving new
pre-harvesting techniques for such conditions. The domain of farming
would enlarge from grain production to food processing and marketing.
I visualize the trade fair showcasing the state of the art food processing
industries for enabling the farmers and village enterprises to learn
and produce products which are competitive in both national and
international market. Another area where the trade fair can take a
lead is to bring out the innovative technologies available in farm
equipment relevant to Indian conditions. Newer forms of co-operative
entities are required to be established for ensuring maximum benefit
to the farmers. E-marketing concepts may also be put into practice to
provide farmers choices in selling. Some of the areas which need
focus are: soil upgradation, dry land agriculture, temperature and salinity
resistant seeds and minimum water cultivation. There have been
successful experiments carried out by TIFAC team in Bihar, where
per hectare output of wheat has been tripled by farmers in collaboration
with agricultural scientists through scientific methods. As a result,
the earnings of the participating farmers have remarkably improved.
Such experiments can be replicated in many parts of our country,
carefully tailored to local conditions. This is a crucial socio-economic
188 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
ICT is a potent tool in various sectors of activities in public domain,
and agriculture is no exception. Demand and supply monitoring of
inputs, dissemination of technologies relevant to farming community
through various organizations including universities, and making
available marketing information at grass root level are some of the
usages of ICT in agriculture. Covering each and every farm family
through village Panchayat knowledge centres, internet and community
radio should be the aim for greater usage of ICT. Successful models
of effective communication to the farm community through the use
of ICT accomplished in different states can be presented in the exhibition
for emulation by farmers of different states.
The core competence of Indian IT industry has earned revenue
of 15.9 billion in the year 2004-05 and targeted 20.5 billion in the
next year. With the non-linear growth and value addition with
innovations in the application areas such as information security,
e-govemance, embedded real time software, hardware and software
integration, chip design, wireless, infotainment and tele-education,
IT and communication industries in India should aim at higher growth
rate to reach a target of 150 billion dollars business by the year 2010.
India has 700 million people living in 6,00,000 villages. Therefore
rural sector is a big market. We need enterprises to service this need
and generate large-scale employment. Entrepreneurs and captains of
industries assembled here have a great business opportunity. I would
like to discuss some of the large-scale employment and wealth generating
avenues in the rural sector.
(a) Jatropha Biofuel: Government has decided to permit mixing
of 10% bio-fuel with diesel. This has opened up new
opportunities for employment and wealth generation. We
have nearly 63 million hectares of wasteland available in
the country, out of which 33 million hectares of wasteland
have been allotted for tree plantation. Certain multi-purpose
trees such as Jatropha can grow well in wasteland with very
little input. Once grown the crop has fifty years of life. Fruiting
can take place in this plant in less than two years. It yields
oil seeds up to five tonnes per hectare per year and produces
two tonnes of bio-diesel. Presently, the cost of bio-diesel
through the plant is approximately Rs.17 to Rs.19 per litre
which can be substantially reduced through choice of right
size of the plant and using high yield variety plantation.
Bio-diesel plants grown in 11 million hectares of land can
yield a revenue of approximately Rs.20,000 crore a year
and provide employment to over 12 million people both for
plantation and running of the extraction plants. This is a
sustainable development process leading to large-scale
employment of rural manpower. Also, it will reduce the
foreign exchange outflow paid for importing crude oil, the
cost of which is continuously rising in the international market.
Moreover, use of bio-diesel is carbon monoxide emission
free. This oil can also be used for soap and candle industries.
De-oiled cake is a raw material for composting. Also Jatropha
plantation provides a good environment for honey production.
We should absorb the best of technologies available
worldwide and start commercial operation soon, instead of
staying at pilot plant levels. I would request the industrial
community assembled here to take the initiative, generate
detailed project report in collaboration with technical agencies
such as The Energy and Research Institute (TERI) on this
project and promote entrepreneurs with financial support
from the banks in rural areas who can undertake the plantation
and commissioning of extraction plant leading to production
of cost-effective bio-fuel. Can there be a better project than
this for coherent development of our rural sector and
sustainable business proposition for industry?
(b) Rural Lighting: Recently, I received an e-mail from
Chintapalli Gramam, Nalgonda District of Andhra Pradesh
about the implementation of LED lighting through solar
power in a remote village inhabited by Lambada tribes. The
village has a population 142 people residing in thirty houses.
The one time cost of providing LED lighting for all the
190 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
houses including wiring and solar charging system for the
battery is around Rs.65,000. On an average, the cost of
providing electricity per house works out to Rs.2200. This
is definitely much cheaper than the cost of providing electricity
to the village through a power line running into a number
of kilometres costing many lakhs of rupees. Particularly in
remote areas and hilly region electricity could not be reached
due to high initial cost of installation. Presently I am told
electric lines have not reached over one lakh villages in our
country. LED power system is a self-contained system in
which the energy cost is virtually free since solar energy is
used to charge the batteries. I would recommend the industrial
community to study this project for converting it as a business
proposition, which can be taken by rural enterprises for
implementation in different sectors. Once successful this
technology can find utility in many parts of the world where
similar situation exists. This has tremendous business
(c) Electricity Generation through Municipal Waste: Increased
urbanization has led to a serious problem of accumulation
of municipal solid waste. Efficient and environmentally clean
disposal of garbage has always been a major technological
challenge. While being a threat to the environment, mounting
garbage is also a rich source of energy. The potential for
converting this waste into useable energy, which will eliminate
a major source of urban pollution, was realized by one of
our innovative organizations - Technology Information
Forecasting and Assessment Council of DST which helped
in developing a completely indigenous solution for the
processing of waste into a source of fuel. This fuel could,
in turn, be used for generation of electricity through mini
plants. Two entrepreneurs in Andhra Pradesh adopted the
technology with refinement and established two independent
plants in Hyderabad and Vijayawada generating over 12
megawatts of electricity which is being supplied to the State
Grid. India needs thousands of mini power plants using
municipal waste. Industrial sector can provide the thrust
for promoting creation of such power plants in major
municipalities as a first step in collaboration with banks
These are some of the examples of rural development projects
which can be promoted by the industry with the active participation
of banks for upliftment of the 700 million people living in our villages.
There are similar possibilities in water, habitat, infrastructure, ICT,
agriculture and many more. Once the industries get committed in all
these sectors in a proactive manner, I am sure the path to development
will be much smoother and our realization of development will be
Business symbolizes competitiveness. Competitiveness leads to
economic growth. Competitiveness is a single factor which will decide
India transforming into a developed nation. Technology powers
competitiveness. Competitiveness leads to creation of brand institution.
IITF can be the unique window of knowledge for smart and intelligent
minds to understand the strength of competitiveness. If we choose an
integrated technology-driven path, then India will be in a position to
become a developed nation by 2020. Some people tend to think of
economy without the technology dimension. Therefore, their
extrapolation will be linear. If we use the right technologies, we can
bring in the right non-linear elements in all our sectors, viz. agriculture
and agro processing, education and health care, infrastructure including
water and power, information and communication technology and
critical technologies in strategic sectors. Another factor which is very
important for growth is that we should have synchronized and integrated
growth in all sectors of the economy which is vital for making the
impact of growth reach every section of the society.
I would like to request that Indian industries should learn to think
big with the whole world as our market by developing a strong and
interactive Technology- Market - Value Adding Competitive Linkage.
It will be a great resurgence for our manufacturing, marketing, and
192 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
maintenance services. Indian industries should aim to become multi
nationals. Our youth love challenging jobs. We have to create
challenging opportunities for them. We can WIN if we think we can
win and act tenaciously with our clear goals in India to EXCEL IN A
COMPETITIVE NEW WORLD AND CREATE INDIA BRAND.
I would like to compliment the India Trade Promotion
Organisation, the organizers of IITF - 2004 for playing the role of
catalysts and facilitators in increasing exports and giving impetus to
intra-country trade. I declare the 24th India International Trade Fair -
My best wishes to both national and international participants
for success in their business endeavours.
Second Green Revolution for Farmers
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of the symposium
on Uncommon Opportunities: A Roadmap for Employment, Food
and Global security organized by the International Commission for
Peace and Food. My greetings to the organizers, planners, administrators,
agricultural scientists, academicians and distinguished guests.
"Uncommon Opportunities: An agenda for Peace and Equitable
Development" was published in the year 1994. After a decade plus, a
new situation is emerging in the national scene of 2004. In the Indian
history, very rarely have we come across a situation, all at a time, an
ascending economic trajectory, continuously rising foreign exchange
reserve, global recognition of technological competence, energy of
540 million youth, umbilical connectivities of 20 million people of
Indian origin in various parts of the planet, and the interest shown by
many developed countries to invest in our engineers and scientists
including setting up of new R&D centres. Also the national "Common
Minimum Programme" of the Government has six basic principles.
Three out of them emphasize on economic development by ensuring
growth rate of 7% to 8% annually, enhancing the welfare of the fanners
and workers and unleashing the creativity of the entrepreneurs, business
persons, scientists, engineers and other productive forces of the society.
As known to all the experts assembled here, India is now producing
more than 200 million tonnes of food grains, as a result of the first
green revolution piloted by the political leadership of Shri C.
Subramaniam, the scientific leadership of Dr. M.S. Swaminathan and
willing farmers. India has now embarked on Second Green Revolution
which will enable increase in productivity and diversification of the
Address during the Inauguration of Symposium on Uncommon Opportunities: A
Roadmap for Employment, Food and Global Security, New Delhi, 20 November 2004
194 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
agricultural sector. The second green revolution will have the farmers
in focus, farming technology as the friend, food processing and
marketing as partners and the consumers as the angels to be satisfied.
From now on to 2020, India will gradually increase the production to
around 400 million tonnes of grains. The increase in the production
will have to be done under the reduced availability of land from 170
million hectares to 100 million hectares with reduced water availability.
We should also leam to diversify to meet specific consumer preferences,
export markets and also in the interest of ecological balance. This is
to be achieved through information access to all stakeholders and not
with central controls or restriction of movements of agro products.
The challenges for the scientists and technologists would be in
the areas of development of seeds that would ensure good yield even
under constraints of water and land with ecologically balanced farming.
The challenges for the scientist is indeed a knowledge graduation
from characterization of soil to the matching of the seed with the
composition of the fertilizer, water management and evolving new
pre-harvesting techniques for such conditions. The domain of farming
would enlarge from grain production to food processing and marketing.
I visualize the state-of-the-art food processing industries for enabling
the farmers and village enterprises to leam and produce products which
are competitive in both national and international markets. Newer
forms of co-operative entities are required to be established for ensuring
maximum benefit to the farmers. E-marketing concepts may also be
put into practice to provide farmers choices in selling. Some of the
areas which need focus are: soil upgradation, dry land agriculture,
temperature and salinity resistant seeds and minimum water cultivation.
There have been successful experiments carried out by TIFAC team
in Bihar, where per hectare output of wheat has been tripled by farmers
in collaboration with agricultural scientists through scientific methods.
As a result, the earnings of the participating farmers have remarkably
improved. Such experiments can be replicated in many parts of our
country, carefully tailored to local conditions. This is a cmcial socio
ICT is a potent tool in various sectors of activities in public domain,
and agriculture is no exception. Demand and supply monitoring of
inputs, dissemination of technologies relevant to farming community
through various organizations including universities, making available
marketing information at grass root level are some of the usages of
ICT in agriculture. Covering each and every farm family through village
Panchayat knowledge centres, internet and community radio should
be the aim for greater usage of ICT. Successful models of effective
communication to the farm community through the use of ICT
accomplished in different states can be presented in the exhibition
for emulation by farmers of different states.
To achieve the vision of developed India, we have to
simultaneously progress in five areas where India has core competence
for integrated action: (1) Agriculture and food processing, (2) Education
and health care, (3) Information and communication technology, (4)
Infrastructure including eectric power, networking of rivers, Providing
Urban amenities in Rural Areas (PURA), and (5) Self reliance in
identified critical technologies. These five areas are closely inter-related
and if progressed in a mission mode will lead to food security, economic
prosperity, social welfare and national security.
The number of PURA units for the whole country is estimated
to be 7000. This envisages integrated connectivities to bring prosperity
to rural India. These are - physical connectivity of the village clusters
through quality roads and transport; electronic connectivity through
tele-communication with high bandwidth fibre optic cables reaching
the rural areas from urban cities and through internet kiosks; and
knowledge connectivity through education, vocational training for
farmers, artisans and craftsmen and entrepreneurship programmes.
These three connectivities will lead to economic connectivity through
starting of enterprises with the help of banks, micro credits and marketing
of the products. Each PURA cluster will connect about 20-30 villages
depending upon the region and population and will cost about Rs. 100
crores. This is a viable and sustainable business proposition. After
initial short-term employment during construction etc., we have to
plan for initiating actions for providing regular employment and self-
employment opportunities in nationally competitive small enterprises
in agro processing, manufacturing and services sectors for about 3,000
people. If the industrial/business parks are marketed well, they can
196 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
generate employment opportunities in support and services sector for
about 10,000 people. This will provide sustainable economy for the
rural sector. In this national mission, bankers can promote
entrepreneurship in the rural areas. This will lead to the removal of
A large number of banks have entrepreneurial development
programmes. Banks have also been funding Small Scale Industries
of different types in various regions. The small scale industrialist is a
promising candidate for becoming the chief executive for managing
the PURA complexes in an integrated way. PURA enterprises can
also undertake management of schools, health care units, vocational
training centres, chilling plants, silos and building a market, banking
system and the regional business or industrial units. A new mission
mode management style has to emerge for PURA enterprises. It should
not be looking for protective legislations to support them. Rather they
should be efficient to compete with others. This new PURA enterprise
needs partnership from the bank, from the Government and also from
the private entrepreneurs. Banks can train the entrepreneur for managing
the PURA in their training centres and also provide them loans for
creating and running PURAs as a business proposition.
Recently, we made some study at various parts of the country
how the PURA model or its components are in position. I would like
to discuss some of the examples.
Recently I had visited Periyar Maniammai college of technology
for women and inaugurated a PURA Complex. I thought of sharing
with you the developmental concept of a cluster of over 60 villages
near Vallam, Thanjavur district of Tamil Nadu which involves a
population of 3 lakhs. This PURA complex has all the three
connectivities - physical, electronic and knowledge - leading to economic
connectivity. The centre of activity emanates from the women
engineering college that provides the electronic and knowledge
connectivity. Periyar PURA has health care centres, primary to post
graduate level education and vocational training centres. This has
resulted in large scale employment generation and creation of a number
of entrepreneurs with the active support of 850 self-help groups. Two
hundred acres of waste land has been developed into a cultivable
land with innovative water management schemes such as contour ponds
and water sheds for storing and irrigating the fields. All the villagers
are busy in either cultivation, planting Jatropha, herbal and medicinal
plants, power generation using bio-mass, food processing and above
all running marketing centres. This model has emanated independent
of any government initiative. The committed leadership has been
provided by the Engineering institution. This gives me the confidence
that PURA is a realizable proposition and this movement can be
multiplied by thousands of entrepreneurs, educational administrators
and philanthropic institutions with the support of the government
Similarly, I have visited other tribal villages in south Gujarat
and there another model of PURA has succeeded through the B AIF
and Gujarat Government combination.
Food security and self-employment with good income is crucial
in tribal and semi-arid regions. I would like to share with you an
integrated village cluster development model. In these regions every
summer the tribal people migrate to nearby towns. BAIF - (Bharatiya
Agro Industries Foundation) has introduced a model in two villages
with peoples' co-operation and the participation of state authorities.
Firstly water harvesting was undertaken to get water for every individual.
Every home was provided with livestock and also a market for milk.
Simultaneously, fruit orchards were established with various fruit crops
such as cashew and mangoes, which are tolerant to drought. When I
visited these villages, there was a connecting road and water ponds.
The tribal population, with radiant smiles on their faces, was harvesting
crops, packaging and carrying milk to different supply points. I happened
to see the economic growth and prosperity of the tribal people, which
has been facilitated by BAIF with people's participation. I understand
that this model Vadi (orchard) has now been replicated in many places
by the state governments in the Deccan and desert regions. If such
actions are multiplied in a reasonably synchronized manner, then locally
generated wealth will increase and create new economic opportunities,
thus creating greater income and prosperity levels.
198 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Let me also highlight some independent initiatives that will become
important components of PURA.
(a) Dry Land Farming: ICRISAT with its international
experience of working in arid regions is located in Hyderabad.
They have developed short duration, disease and drought
resistant varieties of important crops of this region beneficial
to our farmers. They have introduced various tillage practices
and nutrition management techniques to boost crop yields
even under drought stress. We have to create mechanisms
for enabling our farmers to interact closely with the ICRISAT
and other research institutions to absorb and adopt these
technologies for improving their income. It is essential for
all organizations to spread this message to the farming
community, particularly in dry land region.
(b) Waste Land Development: With our increasing population
the per capita land holding has been reduced. Still, over 30-
40% of the land is underutilized or remains idle. Therefore,
serious efforts should be made to plan the land use based
on productivity. If the land is not good for intensive crop
production the same can be used for establishing fruit orchards
or tree plantations of economic importance. Further, degraded
land can be redeveloped with biomass plantation which can
help in promoting soil and water conservation, improve the
eco system while providing fueJ and fodder for our villagers.
(c) Project Siruthuli: This is an initiative started by
Coimbatoreans for Coimbatoreans. This ecological project
aims to bring back the glory of Coimbatore and its rich
heritage. The project is represented by people from all walks
of life and professionally organized. The primary focus is
on large scale rain water harvesting, afforestation, sewage /
waste water treatment and solid waste management. They
have already standardized five of the nine primary tanks in
Coimbatore for large scale rainwater harvesting. Over 600
saplings have been planted on the bunds of the desilted tanks
and are being maintained. They are moving towards a target
of planting 15 lakh trees by the end of 2005. The
comprehensive study has indicated outlet of the city sewage
as 10 million litres per day. A pilot plant is being taken up
for sewage treatment to treat one million litres per day. The
treated water will be sold to the agriculturists and industrialists
as a revenue earning measure. The garbage and debris to
the extent of over 26,000 cubic metres in one of the city's
largest tanks have been removed. These are the major
achievements for developing a growing city.
India has 700 million people living in 6,00,000 villages. Therefore
rural sector is a big market. We need enterprises to service this need
and generate large-scale employment. Entrepreneurs and captains of
industries assembled here have a great business opportunity. Total
eligible aspiring youth at any time in the country are 400 million.
Estimated unemployment reported in the year 2004 is about 36 million,
which is 9% of eligible employable population. Some of the important
areas of employment are in the Jatropha plantation, extraction and
processing (around 12 million); dryland farming, herbal cultivation
and social forestry (around 20 million); lighting through non
conventional energy, tourism and water missions (around 4 million).
I would like to discuss in detail some of the large-scale employment
and wealth generating avenues in the rural sector.
(a) Jatropha - Biofuel: Government has decided to permit mixing
of 10% bio-fuel with diesel. This has opened up new
opportunities for employment and wealth generation. We
have nearly 63 million hectares of wasteland available in
the country, out of which 33 million hectares of wasteland
have been allotted for tree plantation. Certain multi-purpose
trees such as Jatropha can grow well in wasteland with very
little input. Once grown the crop has fifty years of life. Fruiting
can take place in this plant in less than two years. It yields
oilseeds up to five tonnes per hectare per year and produces
two tonnes of bio-diesel. Presently, the cost of bio-diesel
through the plant is approximately Rs. 17 to Rs. 19 per litre
which can be substantially reduced through choice of right
size of the plant and using high yield variety plantation.
200 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Bio-diesel plants grown in 11 million hectares of land can
yield a revenue of approximately Rs.20,000 crore a year
and provide employment to over 12 million people both for
plantation and running of the extraction plants. This is a
sustainable development process leading to large scale
employment of rural manpower. Also, it will reduce the
foreign exchange outflow paid for importing crude oil, the
cost of which is continuously rising in the international market.
Moreover, use of bio-diesel is carbon monoxide emission
free. This oil can also be used for soap and candle industries.
De-oiled cake is a raw material for composting. Also Jatropha
plantation provides a good environment for honey production.
We should absorb the best of technologies available
worldwide and start commercial operation soon, instead of
staying at pilot plant levels. I would request the industrial
community assembled here to take the initiative, generate
detailed project report in collaboration with technical agencies
such as The Energy and Research Institute (TERI) on this
project and promote entrepreneurs with financial support
from the banks in rural areas who can undertake the plantation
and commissioning of extraction plants leading to production
of cost-effective bio-fuel. Can there be a better project than
this for coherent development of our rural sector and
sustainable business proposition for industry?
(b) Rural Lighting: Recently, I received an e-mail from
Chintapalli Gramam, Nalgonda District of Andhra Pradesh
about the implementation of LED lighting through solar
power in a remote village inhabited by Lambada tribes. The
village has a population 142 people residing in thirty houses.
The one time cost of providing LED lighting for all the
houses including wiring and solar charging system for the
battery is around Rs. 65,000. On an average, the cost of
providing electricity per house works out to Rs. 2200. This
is definitely much cheaper than the cost of providing electricity
to the village through a power line running into a number
of kilometres costing many lakhs of rupees. Particularly in
remote areas and hilly regions electricity could not be reached
due to high initial cost of installation. Presently I am told
electric lines have not reached over one lakh villages in our
country. LED power system is a self-contained system in
which the energy cost is virtually free since solar energy is
used to charge the batteries. I would recommend the industrial
community to study this project for converting it as a business
proposition, which can be taken by rural enterprises for
implementation in different sectors. Once successful this
technology can find utility in many parts of the world where
similar situation exists. This has tremendous business
(c) Electricity Generation through Municipal Waste: Increased
urbanization has led to a serious problem of accumulation
of municipal solid waste. Efficient and environmentally clean
disposal of garbage has always been a major technological
challenge. While being a threat to the environment, mounting
garbage is also a rich source of energy. The potential for
converting this waste into useable energy, which will eliminate
a major source of urban pollution, was realized by one of
our innovative organizations - Technology Information
Forecasting and Assessment Council of DST which helped
in developing a completely indigenous solution for the
processing of waste into a source of fuel. This fuel could,
in turn, be used for generation of electricity through mini
plants. Two entrepreneurs in Andhra Pradesh adopted the
technology with refinement and established two independent
plants in Hyderabad and Vijayawada generating over 12
megawatts of electricity which is being supplied to the State
Grid. India needs thousands of mini power plants using
municipal waste. Industrial sector can provide the thrust
for promoting creation of such power plants in major
municipalities as first step in collaboration with banks and
These are some of the examples of rural development projects
which can be promoted by the industry with the active participation
202 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
of banks for upliftment of the 700 million people living in our villages.
There are similar possibilities in water, habitat, infrastructure, ICT,
agriculture and many more. Once the industries get committed in all
these sectors in a proactive manner, I am sure the path to development
will be much smoother and our realization of development will be
much faster. So far we have discussed about the profile of Developed
India leading to economic growth. Our nation, compared to other
developed parts of the world, is endowed with certain civilizational
heritage. For a prosperous, happy and safe India and peaceful planet
we have to integrate the economic prosperity with civilizational heritage
through the evolution of enlightened citizens. India can definitely
provide the leadership in building enlightened global citizens.
There are many challenges in our planet Earth of six billion people.
India alone houses one sixth of global population. Reforms are needed
in the United Nations to reduce the tensions and tensions transforming
into war between nations. Many nations are experiencing the problems
of injected terrorism. The young people of the planet are dreaming to
live in the land of opportunities and happiness. We have also seen
that the economic prosperity of a few nations alone has not brought
lasting peace to the world. In such a situation, it is essential to evolve
the principle of enlightened citizenship based on oriental ethos. The
enlightened citizenship has three components: education with value
system, religion transforming into spiritual force and bringing economic
prosperity through development. This mission can be put into action
in the global scenario bringing together all the nations of the world,
economically and spiritually. How can it be done? All the children in
the age group of 5-17 years will be learning in the schools and at
home, the education with value system, with the teacher in the centre
stage. Every religion has got two components: religious dogmas and
spiritual preachings. The spiritual focus influenced by compassion
and love must be nurtured as an integrated mission. In many nations,
in spite of their core competence, material wealth, biodiversity and
human resource, still certain percentage of people are below poverty
line. By using the core competence, with competitiveness as a base
and the mission of transforming the developing nation into a developed
country, I am sure all the nations in the globe can benefit from the
Indian experiment which I have explained to you in the earlier portion
I have the following suggestions for consideration of this forum
(1) Collating the best models of development across the world,
which can be shared by member countries with appropriate
modifications suiting local needs. For example, the Indian
concept of PURA model.
(2) Promoting an education system with values and endeavour
to make it available for all sections of the society.
(3) Knowledge society is built on innovation which will enhance
the quality and quantity of output from the information,
manufacturing and agriculture societies. Evolving methods
by which nations can graduate towards knowledge society
is a vital requirement.
(4) Change in thinking and strategies are essential for all the
sectors of economy. In this respect I would like to quote
the management expert C.K. Prahalad who says, "The real
source of market promise is not the wealthy few in the
developing world, or even the emerging middle-income
consumers. It is the billions of aspiring poor who are joining
the market economy for the first time".
(5) A world organization is essential to promote in an integrated
way among all countries, education with value system,
transforming religions into spiritual force and leading the
nations to achieve economic prosperity.
Righteousness of the heart of the human being leads to a perfect
life of an enlightened citizen. This is beautifully explained in ascent
and descent phase of human life by Confucius. He states that "People
who desired to have a clear moral harmony in the world, would first
order their national life; those who desire to order their national life
would first regulate their home life; those who desire to regulate their
home life would first cultivate their personal lives; those who desired
to cultivate their personal lives set their heart to righteousness, would
204 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
first make their wills sincere; those who desire to make their wills
sincere would first arrive at understanding; understanding comes from
the exploration of knowledge of things. When the knowledge of things
is gained, then understanding is reached; when understanding is reached,
then the will is sincere; when the will is sincere then the heart is
righteous; when the heart is righteous then the personal life is cultivated;
when the personal life is cultivated, then the home life is regulated;
when the home life is regulated, then the national life is orderly; when
the national life is orderly then the world is at peace. From the Emperor
down to the common man, the cultivation of the righteous life is the
I wish this symposium on Uncommon Opportunities: A Roadmap
for Employment, Food & Global Security, every success in the dynamic
and challenging global environment.
Keys to Gain a Competitive Edge
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the 25th Convocation of the
National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad which is a multi
disciplinary institution in the field of design education, applied research,
training, design consultancy services and out-reach programmes. My
greetings to the Chairman and members of the NID Governing Council,
Executive Director, Faculty Members, researchers, students and
distinguished guests. My congratulations to the Graduates and Post
Graduates for their excellent academic performance.
Design interprets culture. Culture creates values and values shape
the future with competitive marketing. The Faculty Members of this
institute have been propagating this phenomenon of design among
the students and preparing their minds for creating a good future for
themselves and the industry of which they become a part. This I would
consider a significant human resource development providing value
addition to our native products and they deserve recognition and
commendation. Competitiveness is the key for transforming India
into a developed nation. Now I would like to discuss the Law of
I was studying the development patterns and the dynamics of
connectivity between nations, especially in trade and business. As
you all know the world has few developed countries and many
developing countries. What is the dynamics between them and what
connects them? Developed country has to market its products in a
competitive way to different countries to remain as developed country.
The developing country to get transformed into a developed country,
it too has to market its products to other countries in a competitive
way. Competitiveness has three dimensions: quality of the product,
Address at the 25th Convocation of National Institute of Design, Paldi, Ahmedabad,
206 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
cost effectiveness and supply on time. Indeed this dynamics of
competitiveness in marketing of products by developing and developed
countries is called the law of development. The students of the National
Institute of Design have a very important role to play in improving
the quality of the product by injecting aesthetics, user friendliness,
promoting cost reduction techniques through the use of locally available
raw material and creating designs using existing processes.
Technology is a non-linear tool that can effect the most fundamental
change in the ground rules of economic competitiveness.
Technology consists of stages like research and development,
technology transfer, technology absorption, and production of products
or systems with the desired performance, quality, and cost-effectiveness.
Technology development can be achieved through two routes - Route
A and Route B. Route A (know-how) involves obtaining licensed
technology or techniques including manufacturing, design drawings,
and production processes from an established manufacturer from abroad.
Route B (know-why) begins with designing and developing
indigenous technology. In the case of India, progress in technology,
particularly indigenous design, is the thrust area to enable India to
become competitive with other countries. To be competitive within
India and in the global market, it is essential to evolve a value-chain
in a product life cycle. Value-chain is provided for the wealth generation
and quality improvement in percentages. In any product among
specifications/requirement, design, process, manufacturing, services,
and product improvement, wealth generation depends largely on the
design strength, which is 60% of the product life cycle effort. It is
also evident that the quality has to be built in at an optimal level
during the design phase itself (quantitatively about 40%). For a product
value-chain, largely design effort with built-in quality influences the
competitiveness of the product.
Based on the experiences gained in launch vehicles and guided
missiles, India has the competitive edge to design and develop any
type of launch vehicle, missile, military aircraft and reusable systems.
With the partnership of Indian academic institutions, industry and
different R&D departments, we can definitely see the tremendous
strength India has in critical sectors. The younger generation must
understand India's capability to carry out complex aerospace designs
with an integrated approach. This also establishes that India has the
capability for systems design, systems engineering and systems
integration of rockets, missiles and launch vehicles. This capability
has provided the necessary impetus for the production and marketing
of aerospace systems to the customer's delight.
Indigenous design and development capabilities are the keys to
gain a competitive edge. The competitive edge is governed by low
cost, high quality and superior performance, and timeliness that will
bring customers delight which is a function of design and development,
The nation's strength in the design and development of high
technology products and product engineering will also increase exports.
It is therefore important that the Indian R&D sector, design centres,
and industries recognise this dimension of technology.
We have made the leap from CAM to design-integrated
manufacturing for aerospace systems and automobiles. Virtual Reality
(VR) simulations have also evolved. The additional feature now is a
new software that provides immersive visualisation of a 3-D
environment. This technology has been used for walk-throughs in
LCA prototypes which is saving 40% of the design time in the LCA
undercarriage assembly and environmental control system bay. Similar
VR models have been used in designing the Indica car of Tata
Engineering. Rapid prototyping technologies (or free form fabrication)
can build up complex 3-D parts direct from CAD input without any
CIM is the automated version of the manufacturing process where
the three major manufacturing functions - product and process design,
planning and control, and the manufacturing process itself - are
integrated by the automated technologies described above. Further,
the traditional integration mechanism of oral and written communication
is replaced by computer technology. Such highly automated and
208 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
integrated manufacturing is also called the "Factory of the Future".
The Heavy Alloy Penetration Plant (HAPP) in Tiruchirapalli established
by DRDO for Ordnance Factory is an example where this concept
has been applied for manufacture of FSAPDS (Fin Stabilised Armour
Piercing Discading Sabot). Established in 1988, this factory has led
to tight tolerances consistency and repeatability in production, lower
rejection rates, and large production volumes. What would have
normally required 600 workers is being carried out faster and to the
required quality with an 80 member team.
India has to work hard in value addition techniques in its
manufacturing industries, in honing the core competency of skilled
manpower, in procuring raw materials, and in upgrading capital
We must create a sound environment to help the manufacturing
sector cope with the emerging challenges of globalisation. This could
include the following measures:
Special thrust on modernisation and technology
upgradation of existing units,
Special package for promotion and development of small
Consortium of Indian R&D laboratories and industries
to gain design development that will enhance
- Promotion of self-employment,
NID is an important institution which has already interacted with
multiple R&D organizations such as DRDO, ISRO, ADA and industries
to enable product engineering of the prototypes. This contribution
has enhanced the value of the product and increased the competitiveness.
With this background, I would like to discuss one example of my
Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA) a DRDO establishment
has developed a technology for Maintenance Training Simulator (MTS)
for improving the quality of maintenance of Air Force equipment
which has been granted a product patent. When the first aircraft system
maintenance simulator was built for MIG 29 aircraft by ADA and
evaluated by the Air Force they gave the following comments:
(a) They related it to a personal computer instead of high tech
simulator due to the product look.
(b) Visual displays required improvement for better cognition.
(c) Equipment needed better user friendliness.
(d) Facility required for importing visuals developed using
To meet the requirements of the Air Force, ADA approached
National Institute of Design (NID) for getting design support in view
of their excellence in industrial and communication design. NID team
headed by Dr. S. Ghoshal, Centre Head, NID Bangalore Centre
supported by diploma students redesigned the simulator utility panel
to repackage the equipments of Aircraft System Maintenance Simulator
(ASMS). ADA and NID team also gave ergonomic improvement to
visual representation. I understand that the designers of NID followed
design intervention techniques which involved:
* Assimilation of task brief and research,
* User studies and requirement analysis,
* Planning and ideation of design concepts,
* Product visualization and design concept development,
* Value engineering and design freeze,
* Material analysis and selection,
210 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
* Design validation through prototyping,
* Manufacturing drawing release and prototype
* Production drawing freeze.
With this approach ADA was able to deliver a domain free
ASMS to Air Force Technical College, which is now being extensively
used and has been found to meet all the requirements of ab-initio
training of aeronautical engineers on combat aircraft system. With
this background the Air Force asked ADA to develop multiple types
of training systems and maintenance simulator for MIG 21 BIS upgrade
aircraft requirements. The intervention of NID has resulted in producing
simulators which has a high level of acceptability by the user. Looking
at the professionalism of product, potential users are asking ADA to
develop and deliver multiple products to meet their training
As you are aware the rural development programme of our
country is implemented through the creation of PUR A (Providing
Urban Amenities in Rural Areas) in our village clusters. This area is
a fertile ground for creating small scale, cottage and artisan based
industries based on our native knowledge. The designers of National
Institute of Design can make an important contribution in developing
products for enterprises based on traditional knowledge. Hence I would
like to discuss the concept of PURA.
Nearly 700 million people of India live in the rural areas in 600,000
villages. Connectivity of village complexes providing economic
opportunities to all segments of people is an urgent need to bridge
the rural-urban divide, generate employment and enhance rural
prosperity. The essential needs of the villages today are water, power,
road, sanitation, and health care, education and employment generation.
Essential Connectivities through PURA: The integrated methods,
which will bring prosperity to rural India are: the physical connectivity
of the village clusters through quality roads and transport; electronic
connectivity through tele-communication with high bandwidth fibre
optic cables reaching the rural areas from urban cities and through
internet kiosks; and knowledge connectivity through education,
vocational training for farmers, artisans and craftsmen and
entrepreneurship programmes - these three connectivities will lead
to economic connectivity through starting of enterprises with the help
of banks, micro credits and marketing the products.
When the PUR A enterprises emerge one of the very important
requirements is employment generation. In a cluster of villages there
may be many types of competencies like artistic work, cottage products
and small scale industrial products. Most of the time our products
may not be competitive in the international market. Therefore, it is
essential that our products should have a new look and production
capability in large numbers with technology addition through the design
intervention of NID designers.
Now I would like to discuss some of the products where design
and computer aided design intervention has provided a new thrust to
some of our rural products.
The silk industry in Kancheepuram is one of the fastest growing
industries in India. The industry currently employs more than 30,000
weavers in the art of saree making. The industry had to compete with
the synthetic fibre industry in many aspects. The industry was on the
brink of extinction due to the obsolescence of the designs and design
making procedures. This is because, design adds splendour to a saree
and forms an integral part of its exquisiteness. This may be true with
many handloom saree producers in different parts of the country.
Introduction of computerized Jacquard border design in Kancheepuram
silk saree has helped in the revival of the industry. The use of Computer
Aided Design has not only helped in creating new and complex designs
but also reduced the time involved in the design. There has been an
increase in the exports. The acceptance of these silk sarees by the
consumers has also increased with the automation of designing process.
Visualization of saree designs ahead of its production and the ability
to create new colour combination at the click of a mouse has increased
the flexibility and reduced the time for realizing new designs. Though
212 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
the materials and the techniques are changing with the market demand,
the motifs are still conventional to hold the custom and tradition of
the Kancheepuram saree. The silk industry in Kancheepuram has
transformed into a high growth industry by opening up new avenues
for the traditional weavers. The example illustrates that computer aided
design can help renewal of a traditional industry provided the new
technology is simple to use and users are trained properly which is
compatible with the traditional manufacturing process.
Leather industry is a traditional industry. Kolhapuri is a traditional
chappal manufactured through a manual process. This is a case study
of the manner in which the design process, manufacturing process
and marketing was re-engineered using CAD interventions. Use of
Computer Aided Design helped this industry to reposition itself. The
main reason for the early adoption and rapid diffusion of the new
technology has been the systematic training carried out by Central
Leather Research Institute (CLRI) for imparting skills to the local
craftsman using two people from the same trade. The income of
craftsmen increased considerably after the adoption of CAD for
designing and market access. The production increased from about
20 pairs per week to almost 200 pairs per week. CLRI also helped in
changing the manufacturing process such that the productivity has
gone up apart from the use of computer aided design. The designs
have shown a quantum jump both in terms of quality and variety.
The whole project was implemented under the National Leather
Technology Mission. An NGO from Bangalore helped in selling the
chappals on line thereby enhancing the price realization. The exports
have shown an increase. On the whole this is an exciting experience
of using new technology to re-engineer and renew a traditional industry.
The main reason for the success has been the training of the local
These two experiences clearly indicate the success components
of such missions. They are application of Computer Aided Design,
partnership with the R&D and entrepreneurs, value added training to
the craftsmen, and marketing support. Graduates and Post-graduates
of National Institute of Design should work towards replicating this
model in different parts of the country. State and Central Government
should proactively facilitate nurturing of the industry.
India has various forms of disasters - landslide, earthquake,
floods, cyclone and tsunami. Why not generate designs of locations
specific options of habitats of various types and sections of people so
that loss of lives is reduced? Also of options of designs for structures
in sea coast which can minimize deaths and property loss?
There are yet unconfirmed reports that the tribal population and
animals including cattle were not affected by the Tsunami as much
as the other population.
We must work towards learning the right lessons even from this
disaster so that our future can be safe. The fishermen of late seem to
have been pushed to live more close to the sea shore than ever before
due to the demands placed by tourism and urban development. I strongly
feel that this trend should be reversed and the law that human habitats
should be atleast 500 metres away from the sea should be strictly
In spite of various precautions disasters and accidents happen.
Often we do not handle crises systematically. For example there are
high rise shelters in areas often prone to floods or cyclonic rise for
people to stay for a few days till floods recede. Even fast evacuation
system can have designs without stampede which cause death. World
over designers apply their mind to these practical issues.
During my visit to the North Eastern States particularly to
Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland, I found in every village even every
house has a unique pattern of life. They hand weave their dresses and
dye them themselves with beautiful colours. They make their own
headgears. A design organisation like yours can visit and study this
traditional craftsmanship capability and hand weaving capability for
further augmentation through technology and design, so that we can
enrich the people of Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland.
There are 540 million youth below 25 years in the population of
a billion people. The nation needs young leaders who can command
214 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
the change for transformation of India into a developed nation embedded
with knowledge society. The leaders are the creators of new
organizations of excellence. Quality leaders are like magnets that will
attract the best of persons to build the team for the organization and
give inspiring leadership even during failures of missions as they are
not afraid of risks. I have seen and worked with creators of vision
One of the very important ingredients for success of the vision
of transforming India into a developed nation by 2020 is the evolution
of creative leaders. I am giving a connectivity between developed
India, economic prosperity, technology, production, productivity,
employee role and management quality, all of which linked to the
creative leader. Who is that creative leader? What are the qualities of
a creative leader? The creative leadership is exercising the task to
change the traditional role from commander to coach, manager to
mentor, from director to delegator and from one who demands respect
to one who facilitates self-respect. The higher the proportion of creative
leaders in a nation, the higher the potential of success of visions like
Mission of National Institute of Design is the creation of creative
leaders who will be participating in the transformation of India into a
prosperous, happy and strong nation. I wish all the graduates and
post-graduates a very bright future and I am sure you will make India's
second vision a reality through your creative skills.
Critical Features of Project Management
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of Gyan
Lahari - Asia Pacific 2005, Project Management Conference. I
am happy to deliver the inaugural address. I extend my greetings to
the organizers, project management experts, students of project
management programmes, other delegates and distinguished invitees.
While executing various national programmes, my team and myself
have gone through certain experiences in project management. Based
on this, I would like to discuss the topic "Some experiences in Project
SLV-3, IGMDP and the LCA programmes have taught me certain
critical features of programme management which, I would like to
(a) Igniting the minds for a programme thrust,
(b) Evolution of management system,
(c) Choice of programme and project directors,
(e) Review mechanisms for robust management of the
(f) Importance of recognizing the contribution made by the team
(g) Technology denial management,
(i) Ingredients of successful project management, and
Address during the inauguration of PMI - Asia Pacific Conference 2005 through Video
Conference, Hyderabad, 15 April 2005
216 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
All programmes based on national priority must have a clear
vision. On 10 February 2005, three Light Combat Aircraft - Tejas
designed, developed and produced by Aeronautic Development Agency,
Bangalore in partnership with Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, flew
as a part of air show demonstration of Aero India 2005, after logging
187 flight hours. This incident made me recall the experience and
thoughts I had while witnessing the Paris Air show along with Dr.
V.S. Arunachalam, the then scientific advisor to Raksha Manthri, and
Dr. Kota Harinarayana, the then Programme Director, ADA and Dr.
K. G. Narayanan, Director ADE in the year 1990. It was a beautiful
morning, when we were seeing many of the European, American and
Russian fighters crossing the sonic barrier and entering supersonic
That time, I wrote a verse
"Let us build our fighter aircraft,
A unique aircraft in its performance,
Which should fly with Indian Flag,
In the Paris Air show
At that time the Indian Light Combat Aircraft programme was
in the drawing board and in the computer aided design stage with
many technological options and managerial conflicts. On 9th February
2005, part of the vision has been realized by flying the three LCAs in
the Indian Air Show. We have still to work towards flying our aircraft
along with the European, American and Russian fighters in the Paris
and other air shows being conducted in different parts of the world. I
am sure it will definitely take place. We are very close to such an
event. The most important thing is LCA should be inducted into the
service and a number of squadrons should become operational with LCA.
Whenever a project is undertaken by any team it becomes
responsible for executing the task to the stated specifications, within
the prescribed time and within the prescribed cost. This is true of all
projects. To fulfil the responsibility the project has to be provided
with adequate resource and the authority to use the resource for meeting
the end goals of the Projects. Preferably the project report with time
required and cost of the project should come from the people who are
responsible to execute the project. Thus, while the missile programme
was proposed for around Rs.400 crore in 1983 along with the
programme, a three tier management structure was sought with delegated
financial, administrative and technical powers for each tier of
management. In addition the additional manpower needed by various
work centres numbering 1,200 including campus recruitment
methodology was sought. The programme was approved with budget,
PERT, additional manpower and management structure after lot of
discussion at various levels. Simultaneously, a total management plan
was worked out by an internal DRDL team so that a well structured
management philosophy and procedure is available for meeting all
the eventualities envisaged during the different phases of the programme.
This management plan was evolved based on the experience of the
management plan derived for SLV-3 and approved by Dr. Brahm
Prakash. Sanction of the programme with the funds, the management
structure, special delegation of powers and special recruitment process
was the unique feature of the missile programme.
I am discussing now this successful management structure so
that it can be used for other projects in the country and elsewhere.
The management structure of the missile programme consisted of
Guided missile board, Programme management board and the Project
(a) The Guided Missile Board laid the policy direction for the
total programme, facilitated the provision of support from
all external agencies, resolved inter-programme conflicts
and provided a long and medium term vision to the project
executives. It had the financial power of Rs.9 crore per
item. This board was chaired by the SA to RM with Defence
Secretary, Secretary (DP & S), Secretary (Expenditure), the
vice chiefs of the three services, FA (DS), CMD (BDL),
DGOF and renowned scientists from National Laboratories
were members. Programme Director (IGMDP) was the
Member Secretary. Periodicity of meeting was twice in a
year. It can be seen that the board consisted of highest
authorities from the government, multiple production
218 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
agencies, all the three users from Armed forces and the
(b) The Programme Management Board was responsible for
executing the programme and lead the missile systems into
production. It resolved inter-projects conflicts, provided
inter/intra project co-ordination and created the infrastructure,
facilities and the technologies needed for the programme
well ahead of time. This Board had the financial power of
Rs.2 crore per item. This Board was chaired by the
Programme Director (IGMDP) who also happened to be
Director (DRDL) and Directors of all the participating
laboratories, Additional Financial Advisor, key representatives
of users, executives Of production agency and all the project
directors were members. Director (Planning and Resource
Management, DRDL) was the Member Secretary. The
periodicity of the meeting was three times in a year.
(c) The Project Management Board was responsible for executing
the project by developing the individual missile system and
leading to production. It had the responsibility for developing
the technology specially needed by the individual projects.
This board had the financial power of Rs.25 lakh per item.
Project Director was the chairman, Project Managers from
all participating work centres, user representatives, Deputy
financial Advisor (missiles), general managers from missile
production agency were members. Member Secretary was
nominated by the Project Director. The periodicity of meeting
was once in two months.
An important tool of project programme management was the
dynamic PERT chart and not the Bar chart. At every project or
programme management board meeting, we insisted on the presentation
of the latest PERT, based on the present state of progress and asked
for the critical path. It should be noted that the critical path becomes
different during different phases of the project and also different based
on the level at which project is reviewed whether it is Project
Management Board, Programme Management Board or the Guided
In June 1983 the Integrated Guided Missile Development
Programme was about to be sanctioned. That was the time we had to
select the Project Directors for Prithvi, Agni, Akash, Trishul and Nag.
In DRDL, at that time many experienced Scientists in Development
were competing candidates for this task. Many of them were over
fifty. To enable the selection of the most suitable candidate for heading
these projects we followed a novel procedure. I called for the meeting
of the Management Council of DRDL and the agenda for the meeting
was to finalise the criteria required for the selection of the Project
Directors. I asked each member of the Management Council to write
one characteristic which he considered essential for the selected Project
Director. The characteristics mentioned by the members for an effective
Project Director were as follows:
(a) should be a post-graduate or a doctorate in rocket technology
(b) should have achieved excellence in any one of the technology
in missile area or in management,
(c) should preferably be a good missile system designer,
(d) should be a team person,
(e) should be a good leader,
(f) should be able to get along well with the team, and other
agencies contributing to the programme,
(g) should have minimum ten years of service left so that the
Project Director can see that the missiles are developed and
successfully led to production, and
(h) should be a person of unimpeachable integrity.
When we discussed all the characteristics together, there was
convergence among members that the following are the most essential
characteristics of the Project Directors: credibility of the person in
achieving excellence in one of the technologies or management is
the first essential quality. Secondly, Project Director should be young
enough to design and develop the missile and lead it to production.
Thirdly, the selected candidate should be a person of unimpeachable
integrity. With these criteria Scientists of the age group below 40
220 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
became the obvious choice for becoming the Project Directors of the
Programme. Simultaneously, I nominated the other experienced Senior
Scientists as Technology Directors with the responsibility of developing
the technologies required by the projects. This created a technological
link between the Project and Technology Directors. Project Directors
had the sanctioning power which created a healthy relationship between
the Project Directors and the Technology Directors.
As an anecdote to this, I would like to mention how we decided
on the name of the projects. In a special meeting we invited all the
Project Directors and Technology Directors to decide on the names.
We put the criteria that the name should be indicative of the performance
of the missile systems; it should be simple, there should be an Indian-
ness about the name and should be familiar to every one. On this
basis the names Agni, Prithvi, Trishul, Akash and Nag were chosen
and today these names have become household names in many places.
People at large, common man and even high school students are aware
of these names and know what type of missiles these names indicate.
The unique feature of the Integrated Guided Missile Development
Programme was that it included the funds required for limited series
production of the missile systems. The programme, thus, had four
different phases, viz. the design phase, development of sub-system
and systems, trial and evaluation including flight trials and production
of the systems. The laboratories executing the programme had to be
appropriately organized for managing the load of the different phases
of the programme. Realizing this feature initially in 1983, DRDL
was reorganized to undertake the complex Integrated Missile
Development Programme and execute the first phase, viz. the design
phase. The activity level was being continuously monitored to see
the result of this reorganization. Initially, the activity index was around
40% which rose to nearly 60% during the period 1983-86. By this
time, the laboratory has entered into the second phase, development
of sub systems and systems and conduct of flight tests in some cases.
Since the activity index showed saturation characteristics and started
slightly drooping, we had to carry out the second reorganization in
1986 to improve the activity index for that period. With this
reorganization the activity index rose to nearly 70% by the year 1998
when flight tests of Trishul, Prithvi and Agni were all carried out.
Then there was again a tendency for the activity index curve to droop
which led to the third reorganization in late 1989 while the programme
entered the production phase and orders for two missile systems had
been placed on the production agency and Nag and Akash system
were ready for flight tests. The message which I would like to convey
is that the projects, the programme managers and the work centres
must be sensitive to the organizational dynamics and organizational
output of the different phases of the programme and plan reorganization
well in advance so that the organization maximizes its output.
With the sanction of the missile programme in 1983, we had
created an institutional mechanism of robust review of all stages of
the projects. These reviews included preliminary design review, critical
design review, sub-system review, system review, static test readiness
review, flight test readiness review and post-flight analysis. The
important feature of the review mechanism was the review experts
were drawn from different specialization working in different
laboratories and universities spread in different parts of the country.
Any expert available in the field was sought by the project as a review
member which enabled them to get the collective wisdom of specialists
on technical issues. Review recommendations were executed faithfully
by the project team in a time bound manner. In addition to this, failure
analysis board and waiver board were also created for undertaking
the review and corrective action for certain classes of failure and
authorizing waivers in marginal cases. The quality and reliability team
was asked to work out a reliability model of the system under test
and present it before flight test readiness review so that the flight test
authorization board can take a considered view on the desirability of
proceeding for the test in case the reliability margin is low. The reliability
model was constantly updated based on the predicted reliability and
the performance of the system during the flight test. I always found
that the confidence of the scientists and the team became very high if
the review was carried out objectively. Also hidden problems were
invariably brought out during the review which became a valuable
input to the programme.
222 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
I would like to recall an event which took place in 1995. We were
having the LCA roll out in the HAL Bangalore campus. To my surprise I
found that the most important person who was the lifeline of the programme
was sitting in the first row. I did not know why he was sitting there. At that
stage during my welcome address I started describing about Dr. Kota
Harinarayana's contribution in the development of the LCA. I called him
to the dais and gave my chair. Immediately they brought another chair for
him for being seated on the dais. There was a big cheer from the crowd
since all of them acknowledged the contribution of Dr. Kota Harinarayana
At this stage I would like to describe my experience while working
on the design project of the fourth stage Apogee motor. During Dr.
Sarabhai's time, Dr. Muthunayagam was the Design Project Leader for
the third stage. Dr. M.R. Kurup was the Design Project Leader for the
second stage. Dr. Gawarikar was the Design Project Leader for the
first stage. Dr. Gupta was the Design Project Leader for the guidance
system. Prof U.R. Rao was the Design Project Leader for the Rohini
satellite. I was the Design Project Leader for the fourth stage and the
heat shield. The review was carried out by Dr. Vikram Sarabhai. He
normally invites for such reviews experts from academic institutions. Since
it was a design phase, for this review he had invited Prof I.G. Sharma, a
well known Guidance and Control System and Simulation Expert, Prof
Narasima, aerodynamic design and atmospheric sciences, Prof Mahapatra,
radar system and Prof K.A.V. Pandalai, aerospace structure. Every project
leader gave a presentation on the progress and problems relating to their
task. Finally when my turn came, I gave a three minute presentation on
the overall status of the project. Later, I asked Shri Sudhakar, System
Designer, Shri Sathya, Composite Products Engineer, Shri Abdul Masjid,
aerospace mechanism Engineer and Shri Namboodri, Rocket Motor
Designer to give short presentation on the progress of sub-system design.
When my team completed the presentation, discussion time came. Many
technical and managerial questions were asked. I answered. At that
stage there was a question from an experienced scientist. Mr. Kalam,
I saw the presentation from your Team one after the other. What have
you done? How to answer this question? I was framing the answer.
Dr. Vikram Sarabhai said, "Mr. so and so, what Kalam did is indeed
project management. That is how I would like to hear from the people
who have actually carried out the task. Project management demands
that the project team must be able to get things done from different
people and different institutions. People who contribute to the project
should know that they are very important for the project, and they are
In the year 1992, LCA team decided to go for Digital-Fly-by-
Wire Control System (PCS) for the Combat Aircraft as it is an unstable
aircraft. At that time, the country did not have the experience in
developing FCS. The only two countries who had the experience were
France and US. The French company (Dassaut System) had expertise
in Hybrid systems whereas our need was an all Digital-Fly-by-Wire.
Hence, it was thought appropriate to have a US partner who has the
capability in design, development and integration of FCS on fighter
aircraft. There were three candidates, General Electric Control which
later became LMCS (now called BAe systems), Lear Astronics and
Bendix. Finally, we chose LMCS for the contract since they had the
experience in designing FCS for F-16 Aircraft. Joint Team for design
and development of the FCS was formed with ADE (DRDO Labs)
and LMCS. The work share between Indian team and LMCS team
was identified. Evolution of the SRS was the joint effort. The prototype
flight control computer was to be done by ADE. Total system integration
was the joint responsibility. Flight certification was to be provided
The contract progressed though a bit slowly between 1992-98.
Then, as you all are aware, India carried out its nuclear test on 11th
May 1998. As soon as this event occurred the American Government
imposed technological sanction. Due to the sanction, LMCS broke
the contract and retained all the Indian equipment, software and the
technical information which were in their premises.
This was definitely a shock for the Indian team. Immediately, I
called for a meeting of Directors of ADA, NAL, ADE, CAIR, HAL,
National Flight Test Centre, Prof I.G. Sharma, a renowned control
224 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
system specialist, Prof Goshal, a noted digital control system expert
and guidance and control specialists from DRDL and ISRO. The
FCS team explained to these members the situation arising out of the
unilateral termination of contract by LMCS. We had a full day
discussion on the methodology which now need to be followed by
which we can successfully complete the development of digital fly
wire system and fly the LCA. The team after prolonged deliberations
gave a structured method by which the development can be completed
and the system can be certified for flight trials. They also mentioned
that they will support the programme in whatever capacity they have
to work with the ADE and ADA teams.
Based on the recommendations of the specialists we immediately
strengthened the ADE software team with additional ten experienced
software engineers from ADA. ADA was given the responsibility of
verification and validation of software. Integrated flight control system
review committee was constituted with Director (ADE) as Chairman
and PGD (ADA) as Co-chair to support development and resolve all
the conflicts arising between Control Law Team, Iron Bird, Software,
Hardware and simulation. This team met once in a week and brought
out all the issues arising in different work centres and solutions were
found. In addition, an Iron Bird review team was formed with Project
Director Flight Control System as Chairman with members from HAL,
ADA, ADE, certification agency (CEM1LAC) and Test Pilots from
National Flight Test Centre as Members. This team also met every
week and resolved all the problems arising in the development and
Test on Iron Bird. We also introduced participation of certification
agency (CEMILAC) and inspection agency (CRI) in all these reviews.
The aim was to see that any problem in any system is brought into
focus at the earliest so that the solution can be found. In addition, we
made it a point to have a special agenda in the monthly technical
committee meeting on the development of integrated flight control
system wherein Director (ADE), Director (NAL), Director (National
Flight Test Centre), General Manager (HAL) presented the progress
and problems. The confidence building took place by intensifying
the tests. For example informal Iron Bird test was carried out over
thousand hours and the formal Iron Bird test was conducted over hundred
and fifty hours. Similarly, Pilot flew the simulator for more than two
thousand hours. Thus, what we missed from the foreign partner, we
compensated by enhancing the critical design review and increasing
the test time to ensure safe man rated design of the integrated flight
The entire team took the denial as a national challenge. They
said if it is going to take three years we will do it in two years. If it is
going to take twenty million dollars we will do it in ten million dollars.
Our working hours were not eight hours. We will work twenty-four
hours a day and complete the task. That is the time I realized the
power of Indian Scientific Community, and the power of our country.
I realized that no country can dominate us by imposing technological
sanction or economic sanction. Power of scientific team will defeat
the petty designs of any nation. Today I can proudly say that our
scientists have designed, developed, tested, evaluated, and integrated
the flight control system in the LCA which has logged more than 388
trouble free flight sorties in three different aircraft. The challenge of
the development is that the aircraft of this class is being designed for
the first time, and we introduced the state-of-the-art digital fly-by-
wire technology in the very first prototype which is unstable. We on
our own developed the final hardware and software required for testing
and evaluation of the control system in the aircraft, after the foreign
partner leaves the scene and our own certification team which had no
experience in certifying fly-by-wire aircraft, gains confidence and
certifies the aircraft as flight worthy. Above all, the pilots who have
never flown a prototype which is unstable with a fly-by-wire system
confidently flew the aircraft based on their flying experience in the
simulator and the Iron Bird. Honest self assessment, identification of
area of uncertainty and all out effort to solve the problem was an
important aspect of this programme. Integrating strength of industry,
R&D Labs, Academic and Air force helped to achieve, what was
perceived to be an impossible task. This is a demonstration of the
Indian will that 4we will win'.
Two and a half decades ago while I was working at ISRO, I had
the best of education which won't come from any university. I will
narrate that incident. I was given a task by Prof. Satish Dhawan the
226 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
then Chairman, ISRO to develop the first satellite launch vehicle SLV-
3, to put ROHINI Satellite into orbit. This was one of the largest high
technology space programmes undertaken in 1973. The whole space
technology community, men and women, were geared up for this task.
Thousands of scientists, engineers and technicians worked resulting
in the realization of the first SLV-3 launch on 10th August 1979.
SLV-3 took off in the early hours and the first stage worked beautifully.
But the mission could not achieve its objectives, as the control system
in 2nd stage malfunctioned. There was a press conference at Sriharikota,
after the event. Prof. Dhawan took me to the press conference. And
there he announced that he takes responsibility for not achieving the
mission, even though 1 was the project director and the mission director.
When we launched SLV-3 on 18th July 1980, successfully injecting
the Rohini Satellite into the orbit, again there was a press conference
and Prof. Dhawan put me in the front to share the success story with
the press. What we learn from this event is that the leader gives the
credit for success to those who worked for it, and leader absorbs and
owns the responsibility for the failure. This is leadership. The scientific
community in India has the fortune to work with such leaders, which
resulted in many accomplishments. This success generated great
happiness among all my team members. This is an important lesson
for all project managers.
Since the audience may consist of members from the industry,
corporate institutions and government establishments and students
of project management, I would like to talk to you about the growth
of the economic development and prosperity, in which project
management is one of the components.
Nation's economic development is powered by
The competitiveness is powered by knowledge power.
The knowledge power is powered by technology and
The technology and innovation is powered by resource
* The resource investment is powered by revenue and return
The revenue is powered by volume and repeat sales through
# The customer loyalty is powered by quality and vaiue of
* Quality and value of products is powered by employee
The employee productivity is powered by employee loyalty,
employee satisfaction and working environment.
* The working environment is powered by management
stewardship and sound project management.
# Management stewardship is powered by creative leadership.
For success in all projects we need creative leaders. Creative
leadership means exercising the vision to change the traditional role
from the commander to the coach, manager to mentor, from director
to delegator and from one who demands respect to one who facilitates
self-respect. I am sure all the institutions and the future aspiring
institutions are spearheaded by creative leadership. For a prosperous
and developed India, the important thrust will be on the growth in the
number of creative leaders and innovative organisations who can create
wealth through dedicated project management.
My best wishes to all the participants of this conference for success
in the evolution of project management plan and its execution leading
to economic prosperity of the nation.
Chartered Accountants - For
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the International Conference
on Accounting Profession: Adding Value to New Horizons of
Economic Growth organized by the Institute of Chartered Accountants
of India (ICAI). My greetings to the organizers, office-bearers of
ICAI, accountancy specialists, industrialists, economic planners and
the distinguished guests. While I am addressing this audience I am
aware that you are representing over 1,25,000 accounting professionals
engaged in monitoring, protecting and promoting the economic health
of our wealth generating institutions.
Over the years ICAI and its members have made a name for
themselves in the development of discipline as well as standards of
accounting. The Chartered Accountant community of India is one of
the largest in the world. The 10th plan is focused on the agro-food
processing and it is time that the ICAI gets interested in the agricultural
sector as in the case of manufacturing and services. Can the Chartered
Accountants formulate a model which can enable the value addition
in the business of agriculture? Keeping in view the focus of this
Conference, I would like to talk to you on the topic "Chartered
Accountants: Partners in National Development". In this connection
let us discuss about our national challenges.
Our nation is going through a major challenge of uplifting of
260 million people who are below the poverty line and also to give
better life for many millions who are on the border line of poverty or
just above the poverty line. They need decent habitat, they need work
with reasonable income, they need food, they need health care, and
they need education and finally a good life. Our GDP is growing at
Address at the ICAI's International Conference on Accounting Profession: Adding
Value to New Horizons of Economic Growth, New Delhi, 1 September 2005
more than 7% per annum on an average, whereas, the economists
suggest that to uplift the people from below the poverty line, our
economy has to grow at the rate of 10% per annum consistently, for
We have the mission of transforming India into a developed nation.
For this we have identified five areas where India has core competence,
for integrated action: (a) Agriculture and food processing; (b) Reliable
and Quality Electric power, Surface transport and Infrastructure for
all parts of the country; (c) Education and Health care; (d) Information
and Communication Technology; and (e) Self reliance in critical
These five areas are closely inter-related and will lead to food
security, economic security and national security. Can the members
of ICAI provide a business model for enhancing the momentum to
our economic activity and enable us to realize the GDP growth rate
of 10% and maintain it consistently for ten years from the existing
7%, through good governance and competitiveness, based on their
experience in accountancy, auditing and financial management in the
manufacturing and services sector?
It is essential that the benefits of the maximum portion of the
fund allocated in government projects reach the intended beneficiaries.
To realize this situation of bringing about higher yield from the projects,
sanctioning authorities can seek the help of Chartered Accountants
for simplifying the procedures. It will enable easier implementation
of the project and assist the project leaders in providing robust
and responsive methods of financial reporting for bringing about
transparency and participation of all the stakeholders in the decision
ICAI has acquired financial management experience for many
decades within the country and abroad. One of the national challenges
is: How do we get maximum economic benefit for the given investment?
I believe this is your core competence. As you are thinking in terms
of value maximization, I would like to suggest your participation in
one of the very important national needs of the country. As you are
230 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
aware, recently the Employment Guarantee Bill has been passed by
the Parliament and it seeks to provide better job security to the needy
in two hundred rural districts by giving at least 100 days of guaranteed
wage employment in every financial year to every household. There
is a need to link the provision of this Bill to the integrated rural
development programmes called Providing Urban Amenities in Rural
Areas (PURA) as envisaged in the Bharat Nirman programme of the
As per our estimates, bringing about rural prosperity would need
at least 7000 PI JR As (Providing Urban Amenities in Rural Areas)
for the whoie country. PURA envisages integrated connectivities, they
are: physical connectivity of the village clusters through quality roads
and transport; electronic connectivity through tele-communication with
high bandwidth fibre optic cables reaching the rural areas from urban
cities and through Internet kiosks; and knowledge connectivity through
education, vocational training for farmers, artisans and craftsmen and
entrepreneurship programmes. These three connectivities will lead
to economic connectivity through starting of enterprises with the help
of banks, micro credits and marketing of the products.
The members of the ICAI can work out a business plan for the
PURA in their region for enabling it to be run by small scale industrialists
located in the area. The accountancy training to the prospective
entrepreneurs can be part of the overall entrepreneurial development
programme organized by the local colleges in collaboration with the
banking system. PURA enterprises can also undertake management
of schools, health care units, vocational training centres, chilling plants,
silos and building a market, banking system and the regional business
or industrial units. Can the Chartered Accountants give the business
and management plan for agricultural produce in all seasons so that
the repeated revenue costs of fragmented efforts are avoided? There
are several agri-based business opportunities like Jatropha, bamboo,
sandalwood, durable localized speciality foods etc. New PURA
enterprise needs partnership from the bank, the members of the ICAI,
academic institutions, Government and also from the private
entrepreneurs. An organisation for farmers, by the farmers, for farming,
production and marketing is the need of the hour. What role can ICAI
play in evolution of such a plan of action based on their experience?
Now I would like to discuss the changes which are likely to emerge
in our society during the next decade and a half.
When the world was moving from the industrial to information
and knowledge era, we witnessed a changing pattern in the sectoral
share of GDP and the number of people employed in each sector. The
share of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) percentage has undergone a
considerable change. Contribution of agriculture to India's GDP has
reduced from 39% to 22% during the period 1979 to 2004. During
the same period contribution of manufacturing sector has moved up
from 24% to 27% whereas the contribution from the services sector
has increased from 37% to 51%. There has been considerable change
in the employment pattern also. The percentage of people employed
in agriculture has come down from 64% to 54%. Simultaneously, the
percentage of people employed in manufacturing has gone up from
15% to 19% and in the service sector from 20% to 27%. This trend
will continue and by 2020 our employment pattern expected is 44%
in agriculture, 21% in manufacturing and 35% in service sectors. The
displacement of 10% people from agriculture sector has to be
compensated through skill enabling in the rapidly vanishing village
specific intellectual property for undertaking value added products
like durable foods, home remedies, etc. in the rural enterprises so
that migration to urban area is reduced. ICAI has to create a model
and work out methodologies through which the 10% people who are
displaced from the agricultural sectors can be deployed fruitfully in
the services and manufacturing sectors within the rural complexes
either as self-employed entrepreneurs or members of small enterprises.
As per the data provided by the Reserve Bank of India there are
approximately 12 million SSI Units in the country. Among these Units
at least 6% are expected to be sick. What we require is, technological
and skill upgradation, facilitating the market for the product, timely
payment to the SSI by the major industries for the products supplied.
The members of ICAI located in the region can take up the mission
of upgrading some of the SSIs which are in difficulty and bring normalcy
to them in collaboration with local entrepreneurs through a revival
package. Also, the members of the ICAI can think of innovating a
232 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
simpler IT based accounting system to be followed by the small SSIs
with minimum effort. This will be a very important societal mission
since the SSI sector generates employment for a large number of rural
citizens and is a wealth generator for the rural sector.
Now I would like to discuss the future challenges of the ICAI.
The auditing always seems, to the common public, as a mechanism
of exposing irregularities. Can the auditors suggest a transparent system
with easy guidelines? In the world of computers, software developers
use the process control mechanism which ensures that the software
developed is nearly bug-free and the programmer is almost prevented
from making mistakes. Since the world of computers and accounting
are merging somewhere, can ICAI develop guidelines and process
controls and checks, so that the irregularities will not enter into the
financial management of enterprises? Some sectors like banking and
manufacturing are already working with such systems.
India is aspiring to become one of the economic powers. This
will call for the creation of several Indian multinationals across the
world. We have been witnessing certain acquisitions of foreign
companies by Indian industrial establishments. Similarly, we are
witnessing a generation of borderless engineers and scientists working
across many nations. Because of these changes, today an auditor must
specialize in international business, accounting and auditing practices.
Just like software professionals benefiting from outsourcing, it
is expected that the auditors and accountants of India would be the
advisors and the actual implementers for many leading industries and
establishments in the developing and the developed world. For this
to become a reality, a near paperless accounting system which hinges
on electronic cash and credit card transactions, will become the part
and parcel of the business of a CA. Today in our computerization
attempts the paper trail is still maintained for fear of mistrust and
untested authentication mechanisms in the world of computers. Hence
computerization has nearly become an act of impediment and we merely
enter the paper transactions on the computers. This has to be changed
in such a way that the transactions are bom digital and automatically
captured; we should spend more time on thinking rather than data
entry. Hence the fusion of ICT and auditing is essential.
When I am with the members of the ICAI, I realize that by virtue
of your tasks, you have three unique experiences:
(a) The professional auditing of all commercial organisations
including public sector establishments.
(b) Qualified members of ICAI after gaining experience have
taken up the responsibilities of CFOs of enterprises.
(c) Some members after serving as CFOs have assumed the
leadership of certain enterprises as CEOs.
It means, the CAs have an integrated experience of auditing,
financial advice and financial management and providing leadership
to certain industries and establishments. I would like to suggest to
you that with your long experience, you should bring out a book titled
"ICAI experience of five decades in financial management towards
Quality experiences of various auditors and auditing firms
will definitely make this work a standard reference of accounting
experience and bring out the vitality of the charter of duties of the
Always there is one question in the minds of people whether
auditing comes in the way of economic development. This book, what
I am referring to, should bring out clearly that the auditing professional
is indeed a partner in national development.
The members of ICAI have been contributing to the growth and
the maturity of manufacturing and the services sector of the nation
during the last fifty-five years. Now ICAI with their corporate
experience should pay attention to the agriculture and rural development
sector also. For enabling the above I have the following suggestions
for the members of ICAI :
(a) Creation of a productive linkage between the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Bill 2005 and the Rural Development
234 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
(b) Preparation of business plan for the PURA complexes spread
in different parts of the country in consultation with the
district authorities for execution by local entrepreneurs.
(c) Training the local talent in basic accountancy practices
through village knowledge centres being established in village
Panchayats and provide consultancy to the village enterprises.
(d) Take up the mission of upgrading a few SSI units and bring
them back to normalcy through a revival package using local
entrepreneurs. Also, development and implementation of
IT based simplified accounting systems for the small
entreoreneurs in the rural sectors. JL
Time has now come for the Chartered Accountants to elevate
themselves from component audit to system performance apdit. How
are you going to prepare yourselves from now onwards for celebrating
the year of completing the 100 years of service in auditing by the
year 2049? Hence the vision of ICAI can be:
"ICAI will transform into a Financial
Management and financial advice organisation
with focus towards economic development of the
nation and enhancing the growth of GDP in all
three sectors of the economy. "
I am suggesting the derivation of the following missions for the
next four decades leading to ''Vision of ICAI 2049" for discussion in
(1) During auditing of the institutions, the vaiue system of the
institutions will be in focus, which means ICAI training
must include ethics in action for the CAs in their business i
and in their personal life.
(2) I suggest, that all the CAs before entering into the profession
should take the following oath :
"I realize the profession I am entering is the
trusteeship of financial management and I
will assist whichever institutions I audit
keeping in view the societal obligations. I will
not only bring out the problems of financial
management for protecting the interest of all
the stakeholders of the enterprise, but also
suggest possible solutions with ethics as a
way of life. "
(3) CAs will consider their mission is the mission of the "National
I inaugurate the International Conference on Accounting
Profession: Adding Value to New Horizons of Economic Growth and
wish the members of the conference success in their mission of being
partners in the national development.
Auditing - A Quality Assurance
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the All India Conference of
the Accountants General organized by the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India with the main theme "Linkages of Public Audit with
Good Governance". My greetings to the organizers, accountancy
specialists, auditors, administrators, economic planners and the
distinguished guests. While I am addressing this audience I am aware
that you are representing nearly sixty thousand accounts and audit
professionals engaged in monitoring, protecting and promoting all
the economic activities of the Central and State Governments and the
public sector institutions of the country.
The CAG has been continuously improving the audit system and
they have brought in the concept of performance audit, which has
added value to our system. The study of significance of the development
programmes and pointing out the deviation, investigating their causes
and suggesting better practices have improved the performance of
certain systems. Today, the audit is going beyond mere economic
aspects and it brings out evaluation of the efficiency and effectiveness
of the government programmes. Also, during the last five years I
understand that CAG has touched upon the major development
initiatives of the Government in areas of health, education, urban
employment generation, rural employment generation, food security,
basic infrastructure creation and accelerated irrigation benefit
programmes. Thus, I can see that the audit is becoming a partner in
national development. I congratulate all the members of CAG for
constantly striving to improve the feedback system provided to the
Address at the All India Conference of the Accountants General, New Delhi,
Government. The topic of my discussion today is "Public Audit and
the National Mission of Developed India".
I am aware that whenever you give an audit report, which gets
transformed into an audit para and then a few result in oral evidence
by PAC, a lot of hue and cry emanates stating that all the details have
not been looked at. Sometimes it is due to political aspects. That is
why I normally suggest that there should be system audit and not part
audit. Some criticisms will always be there, when you bring out certain
problems in the organisation. If your conclusions are built on sound
arguments through established facts, and the results are going to assist
the organisation, criticisms you can take them, as they are.
Let me give you an event-based experience of the missile
programme which has similarity to the mission of CAG. When I see
the audit and corrective action needed in the financial management
field, I am reminded of technical events taking place in sequence in
the case of flight trajectory. Let me refer to the launch of Agni missile
system. It is a controlled and guided flight from the time of launch
till it reaches the target at long range. At t=0, the time of launch,
automatic launch control system gives the take off signal, after testing
about 600 parameters in a few seconds. If all the parameters are within
the specified error band, computer gives a go-ahead signal. Missile
takes off. The Missile has an onboard computer that carries the specified
trajectory which is to be followed by the missile from the time it
takes off till it reaches the specified impact point. Any deviation
from the trajectory is detected and quantified by the computer and
fed continuously to the control system of the missile. The control
system operates the fast reaction thrusters in all the three axes of
flight and corrects the deviation and brings the missile to ride on the
required trajectory in real time. If the corrective action is not done in
real time, the missile will reach far away from the target and the mission
will be a failure. Guidance and control with its onboard computer
acts as the brain of the missile. During the flight of the missile, it is
responsible to guide the missile to the target to meet the mission
requirements and succeed. From this guided missile flight example I
would like to share the following experiences:
238 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
(1) It is necessary for the guidance and control system to monitor
the deviation continuously on all the three axes and guide
the missile to fly towards the target. The missile control
system provides continuous feedback to the missile. This
example reveals that the missile successfully reaches the
target with the partnership of guidance and control system
which is able to foresee the deviation and error and provide
continuous correction. If the correction is provided after
the event is over, you can see that the mission will not succeed.
Similarly, if the auditors audit after the event is over or the
mission is completed they will see many deviations but they
are too late to correct. I am sure you can realize the importance
of providing online corrections to the deviations.
(2) In the missile development, 3000 engineers and staff work
in the field of propulsion, aerodynamics, structures, guidance
and control, instrumentation and flight simulation. The
success of the flight comes out from system design, system
integration, configuration management and system
management. A dominant group called quality assurance
and quality control group constantly works with the missile
team to find the deviations of various sub-systems and systems
online from design to development completion, so that the
integrated missile performs to the mission specifications
reliably. It is equivalent to svstem audit being carried out
I would like to illustrate a system how CAG can become a partner
to a mission from the commencement of the project. Let us take
second green revolution as a mission by the Agricultural Ministry as
a model. Agricultural Ministry has a target of producing around 400
million tonnes of food grains by the year 2020 with reduced land,
reduced availability of water and reduced human resource. Now let
us identify the stakeholders. The stakeholders are farmers, agricultural
scientists, meteorologists, agricultural planners, seed bank, water and
irrigation system managers, organic and inorganic fertilizers
manufacturers, chemical and bio-pesticides manufacturers, farm
equipment lending agencies, co-operative banking system and financial
institutions, warehouses and godowns, procurement agencies,
distribution system and the co-ordinating ministries from the Central
and State Governments. The success of the mission is totally dependent
on the synchronized integrated action between all the stakeholders
and also the integrated planning, funding, scheduling and proper
execution. Let me explain the various phases of this mission.
(1) For enabling optimum production of food grains from the
available land in different regions the first requirement is
the availability of good soil. Once the characteristic of soil
is known the seed (for a particular grain) and fertilizers can
be matched to the soil. The first phase of the process would
need identification of the land and the type of seed, which
can be grown in the land, and the water availability.
(2) The second phase involves preparation of the land, use of
fertilizers leading to seeding and plantation. In this phase
the essential requirements are availability of right quality
seed at the right place, availability of farm equipment,
availability of fertilizers, availability of funds through
Agricultural Co-operative Banks and training to the farmers,
transportation system for movement of resources to the
locations. How do we ensure this? The availability of these
resources from multiple stakeholders is the corrective action
for the success of the mission.
(3) The third phase involves weeding out, application of pesticides,
timely irrigation, provision of supplementary nutrients for
ensuring healthy growth of the plant. This is totally under
the control of the farmer with the advice received from the
agricultural scientists. The availability of the input such as
water, pesticides, scientific inputs is required to be ensured
(4) The fourth phase involves harvesting, movement, storage,
timely price fixation, procurement and distribution. In this
phase we have to ensue that the produce is not affected by
moisture and rain. Adequate storage facilities are available
near the village in the form of small silos, medium silos
240 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
and big silos. Transportation system is available for moving
the stores to competitive markets. The agricultural waste
is also converted as product and sold. The procurement price
and process needs streamlining at the right time to ensure
that the farmer gets the right revenue for his produce. If
there is surplus production there should be food processing
agencies to convert it by value addition into marketable
product without allowing it to perish.
All these four phases require fixation of targets, schedules and
resource management plan and implementation. In these phases many
of the actions are government driven, such as providing credit to co
operative banks and societies, provision of adequate quantity of
fertilizers for distribution and marketing and supervision of the quality
of seeds and fertilizers distributed so that the adulterated seeds are
not used. Government through meteorological research data has
also to announce the monsoon setting period since it has a direct bearing
on the seeding time and a timely seeding is essential for ensuring
good productivity of the crop. This is the open loop system with
stakeholders from different organizations and different motivations.
Successful realization of the yearly targets for meeting the goals of
vision before 2020 will need co-ordinated functioning of all the phases
of the process. CAG normally carries out the reviews after the task is
completed. I would like the CAG to consider at what point CAG
team can enter into the system so that they can make effective
contribution to the agricultural mission involving farmers, government
supported co-operative banks, co-operative societies, government
funding and agricultural experts.
Now I would like to discuss the future challenges of the CAG.
The auditing always seems, to the common public, as a mechanism
of exposing irregularities. Can the auditors become like partners in a
partnership firm? I am sure this is possible since both the executives
and the audit are working for the common cause, i.e. delivery of good
governance to the citizens. Transparency is the key to good governance
and you can play a very important role in designing guidelines. In
the world of computers, software developers use the process control
mechanism which ensures that the software developed is nearly bug-
free and the programmer is almost prevented from making mistakes.
CAG can perform the same role by developing process controls,
guidelines and checks for auditing in the IT environment so that the
irregularities will not enter into the financial management of government
and public sector institutions.
The application of ICT into the audit system should enable the
auditors to ensure the process control mechanism is built into the
auditing system. This system would ensure the performance metrics
of various domains such as strategic planning, project management,
operational management, risk management practices, business continuity
planning, quality of service delivered, and customer satisfaction. Also
it should meet the desired objective of the Government and public
sectors. If the auditors associate themselves with the executives in
their e-govemance or IT related programmes then it provides credibility
and assurance to the stakeholders (in our case the citizens of the country)
about value for money. CAG team will also be assured of security
within the system, compliance of standards, existence of proper process
controls accuracy and integrity in the output.
Now I would like to discuss about the E-Governance system
being developed in the Rashtrapati Bhavan with active co-operation
of finance and audit. The e-Govemance provides an avenue for making
the Governmental transactions, be it Government to Government (G2G)
or Government to Citizen (G2C) completely transparent.
Two years back, we undertook an exercise to completely automate
the transactions of the Rashtrapati Bhavan both G2G and G2C and
introduce e-Govemance. Today, I am very happy to inform you that
due to the concentrated work of my colleagues at Rashtrapati Bhavan
we have a fully functional and automated system for information and
workflow of varying levels of secrecy - for example secret
communication from any Government Department to President's Office
to very simple day-to-day letters and messages from the citizens, and
financial transactions. We have involved our integrated finance and
audit professionals while working out the total work flow system and
the design and development of MIS system so that the necessary process
controls mechanism and business rules which will ensure the system
242 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
is audit compliant. The software is currently undergoing field trials.
We would be launching fully tested and validated user friendly e-
governance software shortly. I visualize the interactions and
communications between the various organs of the Governments with
President's office will take place through this e-governance Grid.
You can think of establishing a secured GAG e-governance grid
through VPN broadband network with your clients namely Central
and State Governments and Public Sector Institutions. In an IT enabled
environment, a near paperless accounting system which hinges on
electronic cash and credit card transactions including authenticated
and secure digital signature will have to become the part and parcel
of the business of CAG. Today in our computerization attempts the
paper trail is still maintained for fear of mistrust and untested
authentication mechanisms in the world of computers. Hence
computerization has nearly become an act of impediment and we merely
enter the paper transactions on the computers. This has to be changed
in such a way that the transactions are born digital and automatically
captured; we should spend more time on thinking rather than data
entry. Hence the fusion of ICT and auditing is essential with the digital
signature in primary key infrastructure environment. When the banks
and the commercial establishments are now engaged in the e-commerce
transactions in India, I do not visualize any difficulty in implementing
similar scheme in Government departments with qualified encryption
For enabling the e-audit through the e-governance grid the ICT
tools needed are on quality control, e-auditing system, project
management, change management, risk assessment and control, human
resource planning, implementation of near paper-less office work
flow system and performance tracking system. This will enable the
audit team to provide online process control enablement through
monitoring of the time PERT, cost PERT and the performance PERT
and recommend suitable corrective actions for meeting the final project
goals to all your customers when the process is in progress. This
type of paradigm shift in the approach through auditing will make
the institution of CAG a partner in all our time-bound national missions.
CAG has earlier conducted audit of rural employment generation
programme. The performance audit of Jawahar Rojghar Yojana
disclosed that the scheme suffered from shortcomings in the critical
areas of targeting, inadequacy of provision of funds, fictitious reporting
and lack of evidence of employment generated. Presently one of the
national challenges is: How do we get maximum economic benefit
for the given flow of fund? 1 believe this is the core competence of
CAG. As you are thinking in terms of value maximization, I would
like to suggest your participation in one of the very important national
needs of the country. As you are aware, recently the Employment
Guarantee Bill has been passed by the Parliament and I have approved
it. This Bill seeks to provide better job security to the needy in two
hundred rural districts by giving at least 100 days of guaranteed wage
employment in every financial year to every household. How to make
this programme successful based on your earlier experience? There
is a need to link the provision of this Bill to the integrated rural
development programmes called Providing Urban Amenities in Rural
Areas (PURA) as envisaged in the Bharat Nirman programme of the
nation. This is the right time for CAG to provide e-governance based
audit support system to the Central and State Governments so that
the shortcomings which were noticed in the earlier scheme of rural
employment generation does not get repeated. Let me now discuss
audit in the world of e-commerce.
Our audit system had grown with checks and balances and has
evolved over many years. But things are changing. The world is fast
embracing the E-Commerce and very often one has to deal with faceless
entities such as a web site. In this world of E-Commerce, both good
and the evil coexist. While the advantages of speed and efficiency
cannot be questioned, the frauds are also equally possible. The money
can be transferred at blinding speeds and often without an
acknowledgement or a trace. In India, E-commerce is in a nascent
stage. But it would very soon become a major part of our transactions.
It would be necessary for the auditors and accountants to generate a
policy statement on the Best Practices for E-Commerce for the country
in partnership with experts. It has become all the more important
since some of our public sector institutions are becoming multinationals,
having assets and business in different countries.
244 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Many Indian Government organizations today set up and acquire
companies abroad. The rules and regulations and the laws in those
countries may be different. What is ethical in one country may be
unethical in ours. The auditors and accountants must become specialists
in international trade and accounting practices and should be able to
seamlessly integrate our practices with the countries with which we
trade. Sooner or later, we will see accounting in a borderless world.
The members of CAG have been contributing to the growth and
the maturity of the governance system during the last fifty-five years.
For enabling members of the CAG to become partners in national
development, I would like to make the following seven suggestions
(1) The audit teams can work with Programme Chiefs or
Executives of national programmes or projects from the
inception of the project and participate in the study of the
PERT of the project. You will find that there may be ten to
fifteen critical paths for a ten year programme and for five
year projects it may be more. The critical paths in the project
PERT will be the CAGs Audit area and points.
(2) The aim of the audit should be to detect the deviations in
near real time when the project is in progress and provide
constructive solutions so that the objective of the project is
met well in time.
(3) CAG's experience in the performance audit of Jawahar Rozgar
Yojna should be shared with the Rural Development Ministry,
which will enable them to take suitable proactive corrective
action while implementing the Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme 2005. This will ensure that minimum ninety percent
of the funds reach the intended beneficiary.
(4) Audit can assist some establishments in disposing of certain
inventories of system of old technologies. Continuous
retention of these systems of old technologies will involve
inefficient use of the existing human resource and come in
the way of the growth of the organization. Some of the
examples are use of manual drafting system and conventional
lathes and milling machines vis-a-vis modern CAD/CAM
system which will enable direct drafting and feeding of the
component into the machine for realizing the product.
(5) CAG may consider creation and maintenance of a centralized
national asset register. The salient features of the asset can
be put on the website for public awareness. Periodically
the status of the asset may be reviewed and updated since
CAG is the custodian of national wealth. This is indeed a
big mission and challenge.
(6) CAG may consider incorporating a mutually agreed online
audit system for high value schemes of national importance
such as rural employment scheme, PURA, golden
quadrilateral, large power plants so that maximum value
for money is realized in a time-bound manner.
(7) Audit should be sensitive to the fact that E-commerce and
a borderless world would soon be a reality. You have to
evolve a policy statement on this issue.
Auditing in the modem sense is a quality assurance phenomenon.
It has to move from the conventional quality control mechanism to
quality assurance of institutions through the establishment of internal
controls and self-controls. Audit has to be proactive and alert the
system before occurrence of low performance. Implementation of e-
Governance System in Audit is essential that will assist the CAG for
enabling on line process control and guidance to its offices, Accountants
General and clients. This will create close interaction between the
auditors and clients as partners contributing to a common goal for
providing effective governance to the nation in time. Apart from the
planned audit CAG teams must be observant and be able to detect
areas of immediate national concern and find urgent solutions through
I inaugurate the All India Conference of the Accountants General
and my best wishes for success in your mission of providing positive
contribution towards national development.
Bharat Nirman - Building Infrastructure
T AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of the National
Workshop on "Vision 2020 - India" (PURA as Growth Centres
for Making India a Developed Nation). My greetings to the Voluntary
Health, Education and Rural Development Society (VHERDS), Housing
and Urban Development Corporation, New Delhi and Indian Institute
of Technology (Delhi) for taking the initiative in organizing this
workshop. I also greet the planners, administrators, scientists, industrial
organizations, social organizations, academicians and other participants.
Presently, the annual GDP growth rate of the nation is around
7% to 8%. There is a need to increase the growth rate of the GDP by
additional 2% a year for transforming India into a developed nation
and making the number of people below the poverty line to be near
zero, and for this we need to progressively implement the PURA
programme in different parts of the country. As you are aware, the
number of PURAs required to be brought out in the whole nation is
around 7,000. During this workshop many of you will be talking
about the PURA. However, I would like to discuss about the enabling
environment provided by the Government, some of the PURA models
available in different parts of the country and the PURA components,
which will enable large-scale provision of employment in the rural
sector. I would like to talk to you on the topic "Development Ambience:
PURA as an instrument".
The Union Government has evolved the Bharat Nirman as a four-
year business plan for building infrastructure, especially in rural India.
It will have six components, namely, irrigation, roads, water supply,
Address at the inauguration of the National Workshop on "Vision 2020 - India" (PURA and
Growth Centres for Making India a Developed Nation), New Delhi, 12 November 2005
housing, rural electrification and rural telecom connectivity. The broad
goals of Bharat Nirman would be:
bringing an additional 10 million ha of land under assured
providing road-connectivity to all villages having a population
of 1000 (or 500 in hilly/tribal areas),
constructing 60 lakh additional houses for the poor,
providing drinking water to the remaining 74,000 habitations
reaching electricity to the remaining 1,25,000 villages and
electricity connections to 23 million households, and
Providing telephone connectivity to the remaining 67,000
The programme has been estimated to cost Rs.1740 billion (Rs.
1,74,000 crore) and is to be completed in the next four years. The
government has allocated an additional Rs.250 billion (Rs 25,000
crore) for social sector programmes during the current financial year.
Bharat Nirman will involve Panchayati Raj Institutions in its planning
and implementation. The challenging task here is the evolution of
the management structure for a mission mode operation through PURA
where an integrated development is possible.
Bankers have agreed to increase the agriculture and agro processing
credit to Rs.2000 billion (Rs.2,00,000 crore) from the existing Rs.
900 billion (Rs. 90,000 crore) within the next three years in phases.
This will include advances for setting up of PURA complexes and
small enterprises in PURA clusters.
Also, to take care of those who are likely to be left behind by
development processes and to ensure that there is a safety net, especially
in some of the more backward regions of the country, Central
Government has come forward with a National Employment Guarantee
Bill. This bill provides legal guarantee for at least 100 days of
employment to at least one person in every poor household initially
248 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
in some of the most backward districts of the country. This programme
is to be gradually expanded to cover all rural areas. I have suggested
that there should be a direct linkage of the infrastructure tasks required
for the PUR A with the Guaranteed Rural Employment Scheme.
The Government has decided to grant greater autonomy to the
National Highway s Authority of India while taking steps to make it
more professional and efficient. The rate of completion of road
construction under the national highways programme, especially the
Golden Quadrilateral and the North-South and East-West corridors,
has been speeded up. The Government will encourage public-private
partnership in all infrastructure projects. Special focus will be given
to improving rail and road connectivity in the North-Eastern region.
Government has plans to increase India's tele-density from the
present 10% to more than 20% by 2008. The priority will be to provide
both voice and data transmission connectivity in rural areas. The
broadband policy announced recently would enhance Internet
connectivity with increased speed. This, in turn, would help our rural
areas to take advantage of the benefits of e-govemance, e-education
Recently two members from TCS gave a presentation on the
potential of biogas plants in our rural sector. They had conducted a
survey in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu to determine the current
levels of feed stock and energy needs. The survey indicates: adequate
feed stock biomass is available for biogas plants and adequate plant
biomass is available for gasification plants for electricity generation.
Most of these resources are presently being wasted or sub-optimally
utilized. Activities like collection of feed materials, operation of plants,
maintenance and distribution of biogas and electrical energy and other
manual activities will result in local employment making these villages
employment and service hubs. In addition biogas plants will also
provide organic manure for farmers.
Preliminary estimates indicate that a village with a population
of thousand people will require a biogas plant of 200 cubic metre and
an electricity generator of 200 KWs. The capital cost is estimated at
Rs. 25 lakhs for biogas and Rs. 44 lakhs for gasifier and electricity
generating plants. With this capital cost the cost of biogas works out
to Rs. 14 per kg compared to the current price of Rs. 20 per kg of LPG
and electricity at Rs. 2 per Kwh, which is less than the grid power
cost. Each PURA cluster can have the biogas plants based on their
Recently, 1 came across a total sanitation programme organized
at Gandhi Nagar town Panchayat in Vellore district. Here the Panchayat
authority in collaboration with non-government organization has been
able to segregate the waste into organic and inorganic items. They
have created men self-help groups and women self-help groups for
managing the waste in the Panchayat. These groups have established
roadside dustbins, which are being cleared regularly. They also have
special services for hotels and marriage halls. The drainage system
in the village is being cleared thrice in a week. The fault reporting
system is so efficient that sanitation faults in the village are attended
to and rectified within the same day. A village having 2,400 families
generates garbage of over 48 tonnes per year. This garbage is converted
into manure and recyclable waste generating over Rupees three lakhs
in revenue. All the 2,400 families in the village are able to have a
clean green village just by paying around ten rupees per month per
family. The scheme provides employment to around thirty-six members
who are paid employees of the Panchayat. Part of the funds required
for the payment of these employees is generated by the sale of manure
and recyclable waste. This appears to be a self-generating system
and is economical. Many of the PURA complexes in the country
may like to follow such examples for economic benefits and keeping
the rural setting clean, tidy and disease free.
In August 2004, I had visited Keerapalayam Panchayat in
Cuddalore district, Tamil Nadu. When I was discussing with the
Panchayat Board office-bearers, I found that every one of the 1,125
dwelling units in the Panchayats had sanitary facilities. Also it was
interesting to find that the women in the village had acquired masonry
and plumbing skills and they had been responsible for constructing
the household toilets. They not only constructed toilets for the houses
250 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
in their Panchayats but also went to neighbouring villages and provided
this facility on an entrepreneurial basis. This method has provided
employment opportunities to the women and also enabled the Panchayat
area to be clean, tidy and free from diseases arising out of poor sanitary
conditions. Similar effort has been reported from Tamarai Kulam
Now I would like to discuss some of the operational PURAs
functioning in Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh. They
are efficiently run by the private, social organizations and institutions.
I had visited Periyar Maniammai College of Technology for
Women and inaugurated a PURA Complex a year back. I thought of
sharing with you the developmental concept of a cluster of over 60
villages near Vallam, Thanjavur district of Tamil Nadu that involves
a population of 3 lakhs. This PURA complex has all the three
connectivities - physical, electronic and knowledge - leading to economic
connectivity. The centre of activity emanates from the women
engineering college that provides the electronic and knowledge
connectivity. Periyar PURA has health care centres, primary to post
graduate level education and vocational training centres. This has
resulted in large-scale employment generation and creation of a number
of entrepreneurs with the active support of 850 self-help groups. Two
hundred acres of waste land has been developed into a cultivable
land with innovative water management schemes such as contour ponds
and water sheds for storing and irrigating the fields. All the villagers
are busy in cultivation, planting Jatropha, herbal and medicinal plants,
power generation using bio-mass, food processing and above all running
marketing centres. This model has emanated independent of any
government initiative. The committed leadership has been provided
by the engineering institution. This gives me the confidence that PURA
is a realizable proposition and this movement can be multiplied by
thousands of entrepreneurs, educational administrators, small-scale
industrialists and bankers with the support of the government agencies.
Recently, I visited a place called Loni in Maharashtra where a
participative model of integrated rural development has come up among
44 villages with the population of 80,000. The architect of this model
Shri Bala Saheb Vikhe Patil, MP of Maharashtra has a vision of
improving the productivity of the rural people through improved quality
of life with health care, education and employment. The concept is
people-centric development for social transformation. The thrust area
of development has been on comprehensive Medicare particularly
for women and children, need-based health education and e-connectivity
to the farmers. The complex has created 27 educational and vocational
institutions consisting of schools, colleges, polytechnic and ITI including
medical and engineering colleges. They have created a sugar factory,
biogas plants, chemical plants and power projects. They have a large
number of self-help groups for providing low interest loan for the
weaker sections in the society. Due to the co-operative effort of the
people, literacy in these villages has gone up from 63% to 83%, birth
rate has come down, infant mortality rate has decreased to 35 per
1000 from 70 per 1000 and the standard of living of the people has
gone up by over 20% compared to other villages in the neighbouring
Recently I visited Chitrakoot in Madhya Pradesh, where I met
Shri Nana Deshmukhji (age 90) and his team members belonging to
Deendayal Research Institute (DRI). DRI is a unique institution
developing and implementing a village development model, which is
most suited for India.
DRI understands that people's power is more potent, stable and
enduring than political power. By becoming one with the oppressed
and depressed, one gains the acumen of administration and governance.
Social advancement and prosperity are possible only by injecting the
spirit of self-reliance and excellence in the y ounger generation. Using
this principle, DRI has plans to develop one hundred clusters of villages
having approximately five villages each around Chitrakoot. They have
already developed 80 villages in 16 clusters consisting of about 50,000
I visited one of the villages called Patni where the institute has
promoted sustainable development based on indigenous and traditional
252 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
technology, knowledge systems and local talents. The research work
by the institute through field studies facilitates the development of
replicable and tangible model for achieving self-reliance in villages.
The programme aims at income generation through value addition,
innovative agricultural practices, inculcating scientific temper among
the villagers, improvement of health and hygiene, striving towards
100% literacy. As a part of integrated rural development, the villagers
are doing water harvesting; effectively use it for cultivation of food
grains, medicinal and aromatic and horticulture cultivation. Apart from
all these development activities, the institute is facilitating a cohesive
conflict free society. As a result of this, I understand that the eighty
villages around Chitrakoot are almost litigation free. The villagers
have unanimously decided that no dispute will find its way to court.
The differences will be sorted out amicably in the village itself. The
reason given by Nana Deshmukhji is that if the people fight among
each other they have no time for development. They can neither develop
themselves nor the community. This message has been understood
by the society and they have decided not to embark on any fighting.
All these have been accomplished through DRIs "samaj-shil-pi dampati"
(a graduate married couple) a new concept of counselling and
intervention promoted by DRI. It was a great joy for me to take lunch
with Patni village citizens. A new road connecting multiple villages
in the Chitrakoot area is taking shape. In the same Chitrakoot
environment there is another social organisation called Shri Sadguru
Seva Sangh trust carrying out a number of social activities including
the running of quality eye care centre. In a rural environment, I find a
revolution is taking place due to the committed leadership to remove
During my discussion with the Vice Chancellors of the 150 years
old universities of Kolkata, Chennai and Mumbai on 3rd October 2005,
they have agreed to implement a PURA complex each at Diamond
Harbour region of West Bengal by Faquirchand College; Chengalpattu
region in Tamil Nadu by Vedachalam Government Arts College; and
Palghar region in Thane district, Maharashtra by Sonopant Dandekar
Arts, Science and Commerce College. In addition, with the foundation
of spiritual awakening gained from Akshardham, the volunteers of
Akshardham have agreed to enrich the nation through commissioning
of 1000 Akshardham PURAs (Providing Urban Facilities in Rural
Areas) in different parts of the country within the next 5 years under
the inspirational leadership of His Divine Holiness Pramukh Swamiji
Dear friends, the message so far I have given you is: there are
many non-governmental institutions taking initiatives in developing
PURAs. The Government institutions like Urban development
ministries, IITs and the organizations who are present here today may
participate in this effort.
Let me also highlight some independent initiatives that will become
important components of PURA and can become employment
generators in the rural areas.
Government has decided to permit mixing of 10% bio-fuel with
diesel. Southern Railway is using 100% bio-fuel for running heavy
vehicles like trucks, cranes, forklifts, jeeps and tractors. This has opened
up new opportunities for employment and wealth generation. We have
nearly 63 million hectares of wasteland available in the country, out
of which 33 million hectares of wasteland have been allotted for tree
plantation. Certain multi-purpose trees such as Jatropha can grow
well in wasteland with very little input. Once grown the crop has
fifty years of life. Fruiting can take place in this plant in less than two
It yields oilseeds up to five tonnes per hectare per year and produces
two tonnes of bio-diesel. Presently, the cost of bio-diesel through the
plant is approximately Rs. 17 to Rs. 19 per litre, which can be
substantially reduced through choice of right size of the plant and
using high yield variety plantation. Bio-diesel plants grown in 11
million hectares of land can yield a revenue of approximately Rs.20,000
crore a year and provide employment to over 12 million people both
for plantation and running of the extraction plants. This is a sustainable
development process leading to large scale employment of rural
manpower. Also, it will reduce the foreign exchange outflow paid for
254 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
importing crude oil, the cost of which is continuously rising in the
international market. Moreover, use of bio-fuel is carbon neutral. This
oil can also be used for soap and candle industries. De-oiled cake is a
raw material for composting. Also Jatropha plantation provides a good
environment for honey production. We should absorb best of the
technologies available worldwide and start commercial operation soon,
instead of staying at pilot plant levels. I would request the industrial
community assembled here to take the initiative, generate detailed
project report in collaboration with technical agencies such as The
Energy and Research Institute (TERI), TN AU and Agriculture university
in Anand, on this project and promote entrepreneurs with financial
support from the banks in rural areas who can undertake the plantation
and commissioning of extraction plant leading to production of cost-
effective bio-fuel. Can there be a better project than this for coherent
development of our rural sector and sustainable business proposition
Textile industry is very important for the Indian economy. The
basic raw material is cotton. India is the third largest producer of
cotton in the world. However, compared to the world average of 700
kgs of seed cotton per acre, we produce only 350 kgs of seed cotton
per acre. It is indeed a technological concern for the nation. Some of
the industries have adopted a village in Punjab, which has brought
out a co-operative movement of the farmers, scientists, trainers and
the industry and launched for cultivating cotton in over 1200 acres.
A training programme was launched for farmers starting with soil
characterization, matching the cottonseed to soil, water and fertilizer
The project resulted in increasing the average seed cotton yield
of the village from 450 kg per acre to 950 kg per acre. This led to the
sevenfold increase in net return per acre, due to considerable reduction
in input costs. It is worth noting that in this case the yield is above the
world average. This model has already been replicated in twenty five
villages in Punjab. The revenue increase due to higher production in
these twenty-tive villages is around Rs. 20 crore. Certainly many cotton
growing regions of the country can emulate this model. India can
definitely produce 25% of the total world production of quality cotton
compared to the existing 12% leading to revenue of over Rs. 25,000
crores a year for the nation.
I would like to link cotton production to garment export business,
which is a low investment and large volume employment generator.
India is presently exporting six billion dollars worth of garments,
whereas with the WTO regime in place, we can increase the production
and export of garments to 18 to 20 billion dollars within the next five
years. This will enable generation of employment in general and in
rural areas in particular. By tripling the export of apparels, we can
add more than 5 million direct jobs and 7 million indirect jobs in
allied sector, primarily in the cultivation of cotton. Concerted effort
is needed in cotton research, technology generation, transfer of
technology, modernization and upgrading of ginning and pressing
factories and aggressive marketing strategy.
As you are aware, the use of coal for power generation results in
increased quantum of fly ash production, which has reached about
100 million tonnes per year. All-out efforts are needed to utilize this
fly ash not only from environmental considerations, but also to avoid
land usage for fly ash dumping. Though there has been a steady progress
in fly ash utilization from 1990, we have a long way to go to reach
the target of 100% fly ash utilization. It is reported that the agricultural
increase of grains is around 15%, green vegetables 35% and root
vegetables 50%, when fly ash is mixed with the soil. Toxicity tests
have proved that there is no toxic element due to fly ash. But it has
higher nutrients due to increased availability of iron and calcium.
The fly ash can become a wealth generator by making use of it for
producing "green building" materials, road, in agriculture etc. Presently,
the fly ash utilization is in the range of 33 million tonnes per year and
providing employment for over 50,000 personnel. Full utilization of
the generating stock will provide employment potential for 300,000
people and result in a business volume of over Rs. 4000 crore. Many
PURA clusters located near the thermal power plants can make use
of fly ash as a business proposition.
256 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
With the kind of awareness and opportunities available in ICT,
it will soon become a reality wherein every one of our villages will
have computers and connectivity available. These would be the window
to the world of knowledge for our villages and also to reap the benefits
of our e-govemance, tele-education, tele-medicine, e-commerce and
e-judiciary initiatives. In spite of the all pervasive nature of the
computers, they would still be far away from being a truly friendly
access system for our villagers. We would need in such cases, a
human intermediary who would act as the village information officer.
He will be the extended eyes and ears of the villager to the world of
knowledge. India has approximately 2.3 lakh Village Panchayats. I
visualize establishment of village knowledge centres in these Panchayats
to empower the villagers with the knowledge and to act as a nodal
centre for knowledge connectivity for the villagers. Village Knowledge
Centres become the delivery mechanisms, which provide the knowledge
connectivity from the domain service providers to villagers in the
PURA Complexes. The knowledge centre from which the villagers
would access the information through the village information officer
can also be used for collection, digital storage and dissemination of
village-specific information pertaining to any relevant information
to the villagers. This will provide direct quality employment to over
one million who will be instrumental in promoting higher level of
wealth generation in PURA Complexes.
As you are aware we have been talking about PURA (Providing
Urban Amenities in Rural Areas) as a growth driver of our economy
for the last few years. Also a number of conferences have been held
by different institutions for conceptualization and implementation of
PURA. Time has now come for consolidating all the thoughts, which
have emerged in the development of PURA by different agencies.
Also, we should realize that the Government has made a number of
enabling provisions for growth of PURAs in different regions. Now
is the time to work out and embark on the development of specific
PURAs in every State. Certain State Governments like Chattisgarh
have taken the lead and created viable PURA models. There is a
need to consolidate all these experiences and launch at least 100 PURAs
before the end of 2006 by the collaborative effort of societal
organizations, educational institutions, bankers, industrialists,
entrepreneurs and the Government. I would suggest that the participants
of this workshop formulate a plan of action for preparing detailed
project reports of the hundred PURAs within the next six months and
launch the PURA complexes in phases during the second half of2006.
I will be most willing to launch a few PURAs planned by the members
participating in this workshop. We must remember that workshop
and conference phase is now over and we are in the implementation
phase of the PURAs.
My best wishes to the participants of this seminar in the task
of implementing PURA in the mission mode.
Transforming Vision to Missions
J AM INDEED delighted to be here in this distinguished gathering
at the Centenary celebrations of the PHD Chamber of Commerce
and Industry. My greetings to the members of the PHD Chamber of
Commerce and Industry, distinguished guests and participants of this
event. I studied the type of corporate members with the 40,000 small,
medium and large manufacturing units spread all over the Northern
Region covering 11 states and you are contributing towards 40% of
the national exports and the manufacturing output. PHD Chamber of
Commerce and Industry is also actively involved in the rural
development and family welfare sectors. The area of your mission
is indeed important for India in the multiple sectors of the economy.
I was thinking what thoughts I can share with you, since the chamber
has been thematically focusing on "India - Vision 2020" during the
centenary year and naturally, you will also be interested in the business
opportunities, industrial challenges and above all the investment
environment. Hence, I would like to discuss with you on the topic
"Transforming Vision to Missions".
In the Indian history, very rarely our nation has come across a
situation, all at a time, an ascending economic trajectory, continuously
rising foreign exchange reserve, reduced rate of inflation, global
recognition of the technological competence, energy of 540 million
youth, umbilical connectivities of 20 million people of Indian origin
in various parts of the planet, and the interest shown by many developed
countries to invest in our engineers and scientists including setting
up of new R&D centres. Above all India as the largest democracy in
the world has a reputation for its democracy and for providing leadership
for the one billion people with multi-cultural, multi-language and multi-
Address at the Centenary Celebrations of PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry,
New Delhi, 21 December 2005
religious backgrounds. And also our technological competence and
value systems with civilizational heritage are highly respected. Also,
FII's (Federated Investors, Inc) find investing in India attractive. Indians
are also investing abroad and opening new business ventures. As per
the report titled "From the Ganges to the Thames" which states that
the Indian Foreign Direct Investment in British capital is second only
to that of the US, and Indian FDI project in Europe has increased
from just 5 to 119 during the period 1997 to 2004. The Government
is also committed to economic development by ensuring growth rate
of 7% to 8% annually, enhancing the welfare of the farmers and workers
and unleashing the creativity of the entrepreneurs, business persons,
scientists, engineers and other productive forces of the society. Can
we expect anything better than this for increasing the momentum of
our development missions and economic growth? Let us translate
this great opportunity for transforming India into a Developed nation
before 2020. This calls for the agriculture, manufacturing and service
sectors becoming globally competitive leading to economically
competitive. Then the following competitive profile will emerge that
will create more opportunities to the corporate sectors working in
1. A Nation where the rural and urban divide is reduced to a
2 A Nation where there is an equitable distribution and access
to energy and quality water.
3 A Nation where agriculture, industry and service sector work
together in symphony, absorbing technology thereby resulting
in sustained wealth generation leading to greater high value
4. A Nation where education is not denied to any meritorious
candidates because of societal or economic discrimination.
5. A Nation which is the best destination for the most talented
scholars, scientists, and investors from all over the world.
6. A Nation where the best of health care is available to all the
billion population and the communicable diseases like AIDS/
TB, water and vector borne diseases and other stress diseases,
260 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
cardiac diseases, cancer and diabetes are brought down.
7. A Nation where the governance uses the best of the
technologies to be responsive, transparent, fully connected
in a high bandwidth e-govemance grid, easily accessible
and simple in rules, thereby corruption free.
8. A Nation where poverty has been totally eradicated, illiteracy
removed and crimes against women are absent and the society
9. A Nation that is prosperous, healthy, secure, peaceful and
happy and continues with a sustainable growth path.
10. A Nation that is one of the best places to live in on the earth
and brings smiles on a billion plus faces.
It is indeed a challenge of high magnitude. For achieving such a
competitive profile for India, we have a vision of realizing this goal
in a time-bound manner.
Our nation is going through a major challenge of uplifting of
260 million people who are below the poverty line and also giving
better life for many millions who are on the border line of poverty or
just above the poverty line. They need a decent habitat, they need
work with reasonable income, they need food, they need speedy access
to health care, and they need education and finally they need a good
life and hope for a better future. Our GDP is growing at more than
7% per annum on an average, whereas, the economists suggest that
to uplift the people from below the poverty line, our economy has to
grow at the rate of 10% per annum consistently, for over a decade.
To meet the need of one billion people, we have the mission of
transforming India into a developed nation. We have identified five
areas where India has a core competence for integrated action:
(1) Agriculture and food processing, (2) Reliable and Quality Electric
power, Surface transport and Infrastructure for all parts of the country,
(3) Education and Health care, (4) Information and Communication
Technology, and (5) Strategic sectors. These five areas are closely
inter-related and if properly implemented, will lead to food, economic
and national security of our country.
Emphasis should be on full utilization of natural and human
resources of the nation to meet the demands of the modern society.
We should also remember that about 50% of our population is young
people with aspirations for better living. Value addition in agriculture,
manufacturing and service sectors, building the national core
competence and technologies will lead to additional high income
employment potential. The engines for growth will be accelerated by
launching of the five national missions, viz. water, energy, education
and skills, infrastructure and employment generation. The totality of
these five missions will enable achievement of 10% GDP growth rate
per annum. It is possible to do so with ecological and economic
sustainability It is not the mission of governments. It is a collective
effort of big and small businesses, science and technology and academic
institutions, foreign investors, and many others who have confidence
With these aspects in view, we have already laid down the road
map. The priority for the government is to convert the road map into
various missions. It is to be done in a decentralized manner allowing
a greater role for private enterprise and local initiatives. While converting
the vision into different missions we seem to have many thoughts
and variety of routes to reach the goal. This is where there is a need
to have a coherent thinking among all the members of the society,
including the legal and other agencies. All of us have to think that
the nation is greater than an individual or an organization. All of us
should believe, that "we can do it".
Let me now discuss some of the national missions that India is
giving thrust to for achieving sustainable economic development for
all the regions of the nation. I am sharing these missions with the
members of PHD Chamber of Commerce so that you may like to
participate in developmental process of the nation. First, I would like
to discuss about PURA.
The number of PURA units for the whole country is estimated
to be 7000. This envisages integrated connectivities to bring prosperity
to rural India. These are - physical connectivity of the village clusters
through quality roads and transport; electronic connectivity through
262 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
tele-communication with high bandwidth fibre optic cables reaching
the rural areas from urban cities and through Internet kiosks; and
knowledge connectivity through education, vocational training for
farmers, artisans and craftsmen and entrepreneurship programmes.
These three connectivities will lead to economic connectivity through
starting of enterprises with the help of banks, micro credits and marketing
Each PUR A cluster will connect about 20 villages depending
upon the region and population and will cost about Rs.100 crores
(~$20 million). After initial short-term employment during construction
etc., we have to plan for initiating actions for providing regular
employment and self employment opportunities in nationally
competitive small enterprises in agro processing, manufacturing and
services sectors for about 3000 people. If the industrial/business parks
are marketed well, they can generate employment opportunities in
support sector for about 10,000 people in that cluster. This will provide
sustainable economy for the rural sector. In this national mission,
bankers can promote entrepreneurship in the rural areas. This will
lead to the removal of urban-rural divide. This experience can become
a model for other countries to follow.
A large number of banks have entrepreneurial development
programmes. Banks have also been funding Small Scale Industries
of different types in various regions. The small scale industrialist is a
promising candidate for becoming the chief executive for managing
the PURA complexes in an integrated way. PURA enterprises can
also undertake management of schools, health care units, vocational
training centres, chilling plants, silos and building a market, banking
system and the regional business or industrial units. A new mission
mode management style has to emerge for PURA enterprises. It should
not be looking for protective legislations to support them. Rather
they should be efficient to compete with others. This new PURA
enterprise needs partnership from the bank, from the Government
and also from the private entrepreneurs. Banks can train the entrepreneur
for managing the PURA in their training centres and also provide
them loans for creating and running PURAs as a business proposition.
As known to all the experts assembled here, India is now producing
about 200 million tonnes of food grains, as a result of the first green
revolution piloted by the political leadership of Shri C. Subramaniam,
the scientific leadership of Dr. M.S. Swaminathan and willing farmers.
India has now embarked on the Second Green Revolution which
will enable increase in productivity and diversification of the agricultural
sector. The second green revolution will have the farmers in focus,
farming technology as the friend, food processing and marketing as
partners and the consumers as customers. From now on to 2020,
India will gradually increase the production to around 400 million
tonnes of grains. The increase in the production will have to be done
under the reduced availability of land from 170 million hectares to
100 million hectares with reduced water availability. We should also
learn to diversify to meet specific consumer preferences, export markets
and also in the interest of ecological balance. This is to be achieved
through information access to all stakeholders and not with central
controls or restriction of movements of agro products.
In addition to this, there is a large potential in medicinal, floriculture
and aromatic plants in view of the large bio-diversity potential of
India. We have to aim at two billion dollar export potential for all the
three areas including orchids which can grow naturally in north-east
regions of the country.
Now let me discuss about the potential of ICT sector in India.
Today the software industry in India is nearly 28 billion dollars ($18
billion Export and $ 10 billion Domestic Market) contributing to nearly
24% of nation's exports. This is through IT services and ITES-BPO
sector, which accounts for around 3.5 % of the global market. India's
core competence is in the area of IT services and IT Enabled Services
(ITES) - Business Processing and Outsourcing (BPO). The business
volume in these two sectors alone accounts for $850 billion. India's
first aim is to capture at least 15% of the global business volume in
these two sectors, which is expected to be around 1.2 trillion dollars
by 2008. The market share of the Indian software industry in IT services,
ITES, and BPO alone should be around 200 billion dollars by 2008.
264 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
I consider this can be achieved, since our university system is
contributing over three million graduates including Engineering
graduates every year. This is a vital resource needed for growth in
the IT services, ITES and BPO. Now what is needed is the infrastructural
establishment such as IT parks including call centres in large numbers
for providing the services which can be established by our IT companies
and the state governments. We should aim at increasing the knowledge
pool to 5 million Indian youth by the year 2008, which will enhance
the existing efficiency by the factor of 2. Can the ICT industry captains
assembled here meet this challenge? Create BPO, Call Centres and
ITES in rural sectors as a part of PURA enterprises using the electronic
connectivity available in the form of high bandwidth broadband
connectivity as a dark fibre which has reached till the block level in
India. India is planning to establish 2.5 lakh village knowledge centres.
ICT industry can establish rural call centres in the model of Kisan
Call centre established by the Ministry of Agriculture which can provide
domain knowledge in the services, agriculture and manufacturing
sectors. This spread will increase the volume of users and automatically
bring down the bandwidth cost and create a spiralling effect on efficiency
Energy is the lifeline of modem societies. But today, India has
17% of the world's population, and just 0.8% of the world's known
oil and natural gas resources. We might expand the use of our coal
reserves for some time and that too at a cost and with environmental
challenges. The climate of the globe as a whole is changing. Our
water resources are also diminishing at a faster rate. As it is said,
energy and water demand will soon surely be a defining characteristic
of our people's life in the 21st century.
Energy security rests on two principles. The first, to use the least
amount of energy to provide services and cut down energy losses.
The second, to secure access to all sources of energy including coal,
oil and gas supplies worldwide, till the end of the fossil fuel era which
is fast approaching. Simultaneously we should access technologies
to provide a diverse supply of reliable, affordable and environmentally
As you all know, our annual requirement of oil is 114 million
tonnes. Significant part of this is consumed in the Transportation Sector.
We produce only about 25 % of our total requirement. The presently
known resources and future exploration of oil and gas may give mixed
results. The import cost today of oil and natural gas is over Rs. 120,000
crores. Oil and gas prices are escalating; the barrel cost of oil has
doubled within a year. This situation has to be combated.
Energy security, which means ensuring that our country can supply
lifeline energy to all its citizens, at affordable costs at all times, is
thus a very important and significant need and is an essential step
forward. But it must be considered as a transition strategy, to enable
us to achieve our real goal that is - Energy Independence or an economy
which will function well with total freedom from oil, gas or coal imports.
Hence, Energy Independence has to be our nation's first and
highest priority. We must be determined to achieve this within the
next 25 years, i.e by the year 2030. This one major, 25-year national
mission must be formulated, funds guaranteed, and the leadership
entrusted without delay as public-private partnerships to our younger
generation, now in their 30 's, as their lifetime mission in a renewed
The corporate sector assembled here has to participate in a big
way in alternative energy programmes, and banking sector should
financially support these programmes in a big way. Now I would
like to discuss on Bio-fuel and power generation missions.
Government has decided to permit mixing of 10% bio-fuel with
diesel. This has opened up new opportunities for employment and
wealth generation. We have nearly 63 million hectares of wasteland
available in the country, out of which 33 million hectares of wasteland
have been allotted for tree plantation. Certain multi-purpose trees such
as Jatropha can grow well in wasteland with very little input. Once
grown the crop has fifty years of life. Fruiting can take place in this
plant in less than two years.
266 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
It yields oilseeds up to five tonnes per hectare per year and produces
two tonnes of bio-diesel. Presently, the cost of bio-diesel through the
plant is approximately Rs. 17 to Rs. 19 per litre which can be
substantially reduced through choice of right size of the plant and
using high yield variety plantation. Bio-diesel plants grown in
11 million hectares of land can yield a revenue of approximately
Rs. 20,000 crore (nearly four billion dollars) a year and provide
employment to over 12 million people both for plantation and running
of the extraction plants. This is a sustainable development process
leading to large scale employment of rural manpower. Also, it will
reduce the foreign exchange outflow paid for importing crude oil, the
cost of which is continuously rising in the international market.
Moreover, use of bio-fuel is carbon neutral. This oil can also be used
for soap and candle industries. De-oiled cake is a raw material for
composting. Also Jatropha plantation provides a good environment
for honey production. We should absorb best of the technologies
available worldwide and start commercial operation soon. I would
request the banking community assembled here to take the initiative,
generate detailed project report in collaboration with technical agencies
on this project and promote entrepreneurs with financial support from
the banks in rural areas who can undertake the plantation and
commissioning of extraction plant leading to production of cost-effective
bio-fuel. Can there be a better project than this for coherent development
of our rural sector?
Banking sector has a tremendous role in reinforcing the economy
of the nation, by servicing the micro economic needs of all the three
sectors of the economy - agriculture, manufacturing and services, at
the centres of action in the country.
The financial services industry has been in the vanguard in the
development phase in all the countries. The proactive approach adopted
by many banks has led to phenomenal growth of the country. The
days of development financial institutions seem to be over. The current
fashion is the Universal Bank. The development finance responsibility
with its inherent risks is squarely and fully on the banking sector. It
is in this background I wish the bankers to play a positive role to
assist the country to march towards development faster.
In India we have the experience of providing venture capital to a
number of entrepreneurs. Of course a few of them succeeded also. In
the present economic situation, it is essential the venture capital business
for mission mode projects has to increase in magnitude, particularly
with hassle-free procedures. This will accelerate the growth cycle
and competitiveness of products in the world market.
Now let me discuss on how to carry out these missions with the
human resource potential that India has and that is our core competence.
In the 21st century, India needs a large number of talented youth
with higher education for the task of knowledge acquisition, knowledge
imparting, knowledge creation and knowledge sharing. I am working
for it. At present India has 540 million youth under the age of 25
which will continuously be growing till the year 2050. Keeping this
resource in mind, the Universities and educational systems should
create two cadres of personnel: (1) a global cadre of skilled youth
with specific knowledge of special skills and (2) another global cadre
of youth with higher education. These two cadres will be required
not only for powering the manufacturing and services sector of India
but also will be needed for fulfilling the human resource requirements
of various countries. Thus, the universities will have to work towards
increasing the throughput of the higher education system from the
existing 6% to 20% by the year 2015, 30% by the year 2020 and 50%
by the year 2040. The rest of the youth who are not covered by the
higher education system should have skill sets in areas such as
construction, carpentry, electrical systems, repair of mechanical systems,
fashion design, para-legal, para-medical, accountancy, sales and
marketing, software and hardware maintenance and service, software
quality assurance personnel etc. This is the mission which must be
undertaken by the corporate sector in partnership with educational
As you all come from industry, banking and other corporate
institutions, 1 would like to talk to you about the linkage between the
national economic development and creative leadership:
Nation's Economic development is powered by
268 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
The competitiveness is powered by knowledge power.
The knowledge power is powered by technology and
The technology and innovation is powered by resource
The resource investment is powered by revenue and return
The revenue is powered by volume and repeat sales through
The customer loyalty is powered by quality and value of
Quality and value of products is powered by employee
The employee productivity is powered by employee loyalty,
employee satisfaction and working environment.
The working environment is powered by management
stewardship and sound project management.
Management stewardship is powered by creative leadership.
For success in all the missions which we have discussed so
far, we need creative leaders. Creative leadership means exercising
the vision to change the traditional role from the commander to the
coach, manager to mentor, from director to delegator and from one
who demands respect to one who facilitates self-respect. I am sure
creative leadership spearheads all the institutions and the future aspiring
institutions. For a prosperous and developed India, the important thrust
will be on the growth in the number of creative leaders and innovative
organisations that can create wealth through dedicated management
system. In addition, the members of the PHD Chamber of Commerce
and Industry can work out a plan for new type of venture capital to
I greet all the members of PHD Chamber of Commerce and
Industry during the Centenary Celebrations and my best wishes to all
of you for success in your mission of making India an empowered

Health and Social Welfare

Service to Human being is Service to God
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in the inauguration of the
Super Speciality and Research Block of Sir Ganga Ram Hospital
in its Golden Jubilee Year. When I am with you I am reminded of
two incidents connected with Sir Ganga Ram Hospital. The first incident
dates back to 1998 when I was invited by Shri Dharma Viraji, a Padma
Vibhushan awardee, and the architect of this hospital, to deliver the
second Sir Ganga Ram Oration in that year. I salute late Dharma
Viraji for his extra-ordinary contribution for evolving, establishing
and bringing this hospital into a world class medicare centre: apart
from his sterling contribution in the national affairs. The second incident
arose due to a letter received by me in June 2004 stating that Shri
Ramachandra Veerapa, a 96 years old Honourable Member of Lok
Sabha, was ailing in Sir Ganga Ram Hospital and desired to meet
me. He is a member of the 14th Lok Sabha and has been elected to
the house continuously for 8 times. I visited and met Shri Ramachandra
Veerapa at the hospital on 12 June 2004 and wished him fast recovery.
I was impressed by the health care provided to the ailing MP by the
specialist doctors and the nursing staff of this Hospital. I can see the
vision of the pioneers of the Sir Ganga Ram Hospital resulting into
health care with a humane heart. When you give quality health care
with smile to those who cannot afford the cost you are indeed the
blessed. I congratulate the Board of Trustees for establishing the Super
Speciality and Research Block.
When I see the doctors I see them as pain removers. In a hospital
when no doctors, no relatives are around the patients during night
time, in the wards what you hear is pain and pain only. That is the
time the nurses go around to provide consolation and relief to the
patients. At that time nurses appear to be angels for the patients to
Address at the inauguration of the Super Speciality and Research Block of Sir Ganga
Ram Hospital, New Delhi, 16 July 2004
272 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
cater to their requirements like medicines, dressing and other daily
needs. All of you provide yeoman service in removing human miseries
and pain with human intelligence and patience. "Service to human
being is service to God". I greet the management, doctors, paramedical
and support staff for their contribution in providing the state-of-the-
art medicare to the needy patients. I was thinking what I should talk
to this audience. I would like to share my views on the mission of
The Union Finance Minister during his Budget Speech on 8th
July 2004 has extended the benefit of Section 80-IB to new hospitals
with 100 beds or more set up in rural areas. Such hospitals will be
entitled to a 100 per cent deduction of their profits for a period of five
years. With the future vision for newer hospitals, institutions like Sir
Ganga Ram Hospital can consider establishing hospitals in certain
rural sectors, especially in the states like Bihar, Orissa and eastern
UP. These rural hospitals can be established in such a way that quality
health care can be assured for all in the country.
These rural hospitals can be linked through tele-medicine models
to hospitals in urban areas. One of the institutions Narayana Hrudayalaya
has connected 19 remote areas with Kolkata and Bangalore. They
have treated 12,000 patients through telemedicine. The partners in
this mission are private sector hospital and government hospitals.
CARE Hospitals Hyderabad has a tele-medicine link between
Hyderabad, Mehaboobnagar, Agartala and Delhi. Similarly, Indian
Space Research Organisation (ISRO) has connected some leading
hospitals to their health centres. These models can be replicated in
different areas in the country to provide affordable, quality medicare
to our rural masses who will have the benefit of attention from the
renowned specialists of Sir Ganga Ram Hospital.
In addition to the above to make medicare affordable, a Medical
Insurance Scheme which is in vogue in some parts of the country can
be implemented by Sir Ganga Ram Hospital. In Karnataka, the state
co-operative department in collaboration with Narayana Hrudayalaya
has come out with a scheme called Yeshasvini. In this scheme, the
villagers are required to pay a premium of Rs.5 per month. The
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 273
government contribution is Rs.2.50 per month. There are 17 lakh
members in this scheme; the members are eligible to get free treatment
from the best available medicare facility in the state in 85 recognized
hospitals. Presently in this scheme they have provided free medical
consultation to 27,000 people and carried out 7000 operations including
600 open-heart operations in 7 months. This model or an improved
version can be considered by Sir Ganga Ram Hospital for many states
for providing quality health care to the village community at an
In India we are having a variety of traditional systems of medicines
such as Yoga and Naturopathy, Ayurveda, Unani, Homoeopathy and
Siddha. These ancient systems of medicines are unique to our country
and many times they are complementary to each other. This system
needs scientific method of testing with clinical data. I would consider
appropriate to create these wings in the hospital so that patients can
have a choice in determining the system of medicine, which they
would like to have. This will enable rapid development of medicines
and fast track clearance of products through integrated clinical trials
and approval from ethical committee. This area will be a great wealth
generator for the nation.
I would like to recall an experience during my work as Scientific
Adviser to Raksha Mantri. The lifestyle change pattern can be a great
influencer in reducing the occurrence of cardiac problem among the
Indian population. I recall there was a joint project of Defence Institute
of Physiology and Allied Sciences (DIPAS), DRDO and the Global
Hospital Research Centre governed by the Brahma Kumaris for studying
the effect of "holistic lifestyle intervention" on the patients suffering
from Coronary Artery Diseases after angioplasty and surgical
intervention. The project involved both Control Group and the
Experimental Group. The Control Group was subjected to conventional
treatment whereas the Experimental Group was supported by an
intervention involving low fat, high fibre vegetarian diet, walking
and aerobic exercises and systematic meditation. This psycho-
physiological mind-body approach in treating heart patients of the
Experimental Group resulted in dissolution of angiographic plaque
and improvement in microcirculation of blood in heart components
274 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
of the patients. The treatment was also supported by participation of
spouses and other family members of the patients, leading to a unique
family system approach to medicare.
When I conducted the first review of the project, I found that
nearly 60 people had reported positively about their well-being and
their clinical reports showed remarkable improvement. When I visited
the hospital again after two years, nearly 400 patients gave us a joyful
presentation about their experiences. It was an experience of great
happiness to see the patients presenting their X-ray records and
angiogram, showing us how this unique way of treatment has given
great relief to their hearts. The conflict between cardiology, psychology
and theology still persists, but this experiment has given a new thrust
and a lasting cure for heart patients. The message I would like to
convey is that through the integration of medical science, physiology,
health care, psychology and spirituality, a native Indian knowledge
system in combination with allopathic systems can emerge. Sir Ganga
Ram Hospital research team can study this model, improve them and
apply them in their hospitals.
Recently I met Prof. Vijay K Varadan of Pennsylvania State
University, US. He shared his experience on the possible line of
treatment for Parkinson's disease and epilepsy. The primary symptoms
in Parkinson disease as you all are aware are tremor or trembling in
hands, arms, legs, jaw, and face, rigidity or stiffness of the limbs,
slowness of movement and impaired balance. Prof Varadan has devised
a wireless system for monitoring and control of Parkinson's disease.
The system consists of an implantable DNA insert in the head region
for generating a pulse to the nerve system; controlled either by a modified
pacemaker or smart hat. A passive polymer based gyro sensor is
implanted in the tremor location. The sensor gets the power from the
pacemaker and the pacemaker then reads the tremor motion. The
pacemaker then generates the pulse in the implanted device in the
head to control the tremor. This appears to be a promising line of
treatment for such diseases. Prof. Varadan also has reported that the
few patients affected by Parkinson's diseases had a full recovery. I
would recommend Ganga Ram Hospital team to work in such frontier
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 275
Newer knowledge emerging out of research on stem cells from
abroad and India has to be taken note of and studied - drawing of
tens of thousands of stem cell - immature cells that are capable of
transforming themselves into almost any kind of tissues - from the
suffering patients and inject them into the heart to stimulate heart
repair. In one case, it is reported that the pumping efficiency has
increased from 25% to 40% over a period of four months. In 2003,
successful stem cell procedures that resulted in measurable boost in
blood pumping capacity have increased substantially in many countries
across the globe. This holds a big promise for effective heart repair
During my visit to various laboratories in India, I happened to
see the beginning of stem ceil research for different purposes including
brain research. I would like to share with you an important stem cell
research application in the field of cardiology. When I met Dr. P.
Venugopal, Director, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)
a famous cardiovascular and thoracic surgeon, he told me about his
experiences. He said in one of the cardiac diseases, where conventional
medical and surgical treatments were ineffective because of the affliction
of the heart muscle, use of autologous bone marrow stem cells
implantation into the diseased heart muscles had been applied in order
to improve the function of heart muscle. This kind of application of
this procedure is the latest, and very few cases have been done in the
world, the first time in India. This is expected to open new frontiers
in the treatment of patients for regeneration of heart muscles, thereby
giving new hope for the patients suffering from end stage heart disease.
I suggest the Sir Gangaram Hospital may participate in such a great
We need good hearts to treat the ailing patients, we need helping
hands to remove the pain, and we need beautiful minds to give happiness
to the patients. In this context, I would like to recall and share the
essence of a poem. When God first created the human being, it took
millions and millions of years to get the right human form. He went
on experimenting and finally he realized the human configuration he
wanted. Once realized, He gave life. First the man opened his eyes
and said, "I thank you, Almighty." Second thing he did, he smiled.
276 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Almighty was very happy that his creation has done two right things.
Then, God was preoccupied for some time, later when God looked at
the man he found something is missing in him. He generated the fire
in milli-seconds and created Shaitan (devil) out of the fire. He asked
Shaitan to prostrate before the first human being as he is His image.
The Shaitan refused to prostrate. He said, "Oh! Almighty you have
created me out of fire, I am a superior creation". The God was taken
aback. He thought for a while and decided to integrate the man and
Shaitan into one single system, that is, the human beings what we
are. If we want to become close to Almighty God, let our mind and
hand be kind to human beings who are suffering particularly with
disease. That means we have defeated the Shaitan within us. The
question is who will defeat whom? May God bless you to be close to
God's image. Your kindness will flow through your actions, thousands
and thousands of patients will be relieved of the pain and they will
say "Thank you doctor" with the smile. That means you are in God's
I am happy to inaugurate the Super Speciality and Research Block
of Sir Ganga Ram Hospital. My best wishes to all members of Sir
Ganga Ram Hospital community for success in their missions.
Elimination of Polio - A Global Mission
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the International Polio Plus
Summit organized by the Rotary International. I greet the organizers,
members of the Central and State Governments^ members of the
participating countries, World Health Organization, UNICEF, Centre
for Disease Control (Atlanta), scientists, doctors and other distinguished
Rotary International has been in the task of eradicating polio
since the year 1985. In India the programme commenced in 1985.
The worldwide polio incident has declined from 3,50,000 a year to
1918 cases in 2002 and 225 cases in 2003. The cases so far. reported
in the year 2004 are 30. The majority of the cases reported belong to
Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. The occurrence of polio is high in certain
districts of Uttar Pradesh, viz. Badaun, Moradabad, Muzaffarnagar,
and Saharanpur. The state and central health ministries have to mount
a mission mode programme to make UP and Bihar polio-free.
There is a need to establish the causes of such occurrence and
find remedial measures so that we can eradicate the occurrence of
polio from these districts. We can adopt the following strategy for
motivating the families to bring the children for vaccination. There
must be a system to watch the health care requirement of every new
born child in the families in the villages and towns of these districts.
Once the record of the children is available the health authorities must
go to the parents and educate them on the necessity for immunizing
the child against polio. They must also be told that there is no side
effect for the child due to polio vaccination. Also, it may be advisable
to have polio camps in these villages on a monthly basis using a mobile
clinic so that all the children in the age group of zero to three are
Address at the inauguration of International Polio Plus Summit, New Delhi, 7 August

278 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
immunized during these camps. The children who are not brought
for immunization should also be tracked and it may be necessary to
send the doctor or nursing assistants to their homes for providing the
immunization. If this special attention is given, I am sure we can
certainly make Uttar Pradesh and Bihar totally free from polio.
It is reported that there are some stray incidents where the child
is affected by the polio even after vaccination. This can happen in
those regions where the dosage is not able to cope with the viral load
in the region. In such cases it will be necessary to increase the dose
and also adopt clinical methods to find whether the immunization
has taken place or not after the administration of polio vaccine. I am
sure the medical community will be able to find an effective solution
to this problem. I am happy to note that from thousands and hundreds
of cases uf polio occurrence in the past years we have come to a
double digit number this year. This I would consider definitely as a
commendable achievement. However, we cannot slacken our efforts
till we see that there is zero occurrence of polio in the country from
all the districts. The Rotary International and the participating
organisations are definitely carrying out a very noble mission of
removing the pain of the people. I can certainly imagine the pain of
the parents whose children are affected by polio.
An important event I would like to share with you is about the
fitment of FRO (Floor Reaction Orthosis) to a polio affected child.
During my visit to one of the hospitals in Hyderabad, I found many
children were struggling to walk with an artificial limb weighing over
3 kgs. At the request of Prof. Prasad of NIMS, Head of orthopaedic
department at that time, I asked my AGNI friends why we cannot use
the composite material used for AGNI heat shield for fabricating FROs
lor polio affected patients. They immediately said it is possible. We
worked on this project for some time and came up with an FRO for
the child weighing around 300 gms. exactly 1/10th of the weight which
the child was carrying. The doctors helped us to fit the new light
weight FRO on the child and the child started walking and running
around. Her parents were also present. Tears rolled down from the
eyes ot the parents seeing their daughter running with light caliper.
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 279
With the lightweight device provided by the hospital she could
run, ride a bicycle and do all sorts of things which she had been denied
for a long time. The removal of the pain and the freedom attained by
the child gave me a state of bliss which I never experienced during
any of the major successes in my career. This bliss came when a
polio affected child started walking and running. I will experience
greater bliss if the child in the first place is not affected by the polio
at all. I am sure all of you assembled here are in this mission. With
your persistent efforts we should see that no polio case occurs during
the year 2005 and beyond. I would appeal to all the parents to take
pro-active steps to get their children immunized. It should be the
responsibility of all the social organizations working in our districts
to send this message to all the people living in the region. Also, they
must work with medical organizations to make the doctors reach the
remote areas and immunize the child well before the danger strikes.
The central and state governments have to take up another mission
to get the statistics of total number of affected poiio children and
grown-ups. There are two groups of affected people. I have observed
that in one case we can fit the FRO's to the polio affected patients
directly and they become useful to the society. Such people constitute
70% of the cases. The remaining 30% cases need surgical intervention
before fitment of the gadgets like calipers to the patients. This mission
has to be taken up jointly by the state and central governments.
I see the commitment from various organizations for the elimination
of polio in different regions. I would like to share another area of
concern with this audience. Various parts of the world are getting
affected by HIV/AIDS. It is time that the national and international
agencies joined together to mount a concerted programme in eliminating
this dreaded disease from the planet earth. It can be a global mission
with international agencies, WHO, Rotary international and member
countries as partners. Definitely, India will be a partner in this mission.
I am very happy to see the pioneering mission of the Rotary international,
which commenced in 1985, culminating in a polio free world by 2005.
India definitely is heading towards that.
280 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
India and Pakistan assembling here in the same dais today to
fight polio-virus is a beautiful thing to happen. We have our enemies,
common enemies, that is poverty and disease. Let us fight against
these enemies instead of fighting amongst ourselves.
My best wishes to all of you for success in your mission of
eradicating the pain of humanity.
Mission towards Healthy Hearts
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of the
International Centre for Biomedical Sciences and Technology
(Research, Training and Application). My greetings to the surgeons,
doctors, medical scientists and technologists, pharmacologists,
distinguished guests and all the participants. Cardiac care is a vital
health care area for the Indian community. I am happy to note that
this centre in collaboration with Manipal Academy of Higher Education,
Bangalore, Sri Venkateswara Institute of Medical Sciences, Tirupati,
Meenakshi Academy of Higher Education and Research, Chennai,
Birla Institute of Technology and Sciences, Pilani and Indian Institute
of Technology, Madras is planning graduate programmes in Bio
technology, Bio-Informatics, Bio-Medical Engineering, Genetic
Engineering and Genetics. This Centre has a unique system of patient
information system, which can be accessed by the relatives and friends
of the patients admitted in this hospital for getting online information
about the patients' condition. In this gathering I would like to discuss
on the "Mission towards Healthy Hearts".
Recently, three Indians along with other nationals were
abducted in Iraq, and India was making all-out efforts to convince
the abductors for getting them released. Around that time Dr K.M.
Cherian wrote to me that, as an example of the sympathy and
consideration which a common man in India has for the Iraqis the
example of twenty complicated open heart surgeries conducted on
Iraqi children as early as February-March 2004 by the International
Centre for Cardiothoracic and Vascular Diseases. He has done it merely
out of human compassion. Much later, this information was provided
to the concerned Ministry for using in the negotiation process with
Address during the inauguration of the International Centre for Biomedical Sciences
and Technologies (Research, Training & Applications), Chennai, 2 October 2004
282 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
the abductors. This example shows that the noble medical profession
does not see geographical barriers and every heart is the same for this
This Centre has established the first Cardiology and Cardiovascular
Centre in the rural set-up in the village of Parumala in Kerala which
has a population of 8300. I am happy to note that the Centre had
already carried out 300 angiograms, 25 angioplasties with stenting
and nearly 100 open heart surgeries including on children. This is a
good rural development model where high quality health care has
reached the remote villages and I am sure this facility can be extended
as a medical tourism project to other villages in the country. This
type of data and work done to the society should be utilized for realizing
quality health care for the rural sector. At this stage let me narrate an
example which touched my heart.
In October 2002,1 inaugurated the CARE Hospitals telemedicine
units at the G.B. Pant Hospital, Tripura, and I interacted with patients
at different centres where I came across a 13 year old boy from Kailashar,
Tripura. His parents are farm labourers and even a tiny piece of land
they own was sold to provide medical treatment to this boy before
CARE hospital diagnosed the problem of this boy. This boy was
suffering from chronic rheumatic heart disease with severe mitral
stenosis. His heart ailment was noticed three years ago, when he
complained of breathlessness and chest pain. He was also coughing
blood and lost weight, according to his elder brother Ismail Ali. Doctors
at Agartala found that his condition was serious and needed specialized
treatment which was expensive. He discontinued his studies as he
couldn't take the strain of walking down to the school or even play
around with the other kids. He was taken to the CARE Hospital at
Hyderabad, and was treated by Dr. B. Somaraju and Dr. Raghava
Raju who carried out the balloon dilatation. The entire treatment and
travel expenses were borne by the hospital. The boy's condition is
being continuously monitored and he is doing fine. He has also started
going to school. CARE foundation has recently started a "Little Hearts
Foundation" through voluntary contributions made by philanthropists.
They have so far carried out 58 heart operations on children.
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELL ARE 283
Now I would like to discuss some of the leading research areas.
Animal experiments have shown that stem cell can be coaxed to
become nerve cell and nerve cell to become a muscle cell. It has also
been learnt that the stem cell seems to go preferentially to injured
tissues when introduced in an animal. These findings are useful for
treating diseases where cells are damaged or malfunctioning and require
replacement. Parkinson's disease, juvenile diabetes, stroke, spinal cord
injuries, and mental retardation in children may find cure through
this treatment. Prof Venugpal has done treatment of diseased hardened
I would like to share with you the research work done by Prof
Vijay K. Varadan of Pennsylvania State University, U.S. He shared
with me the possible line of treatment for Parkinson's disease and
epilepsy. The primary symptoms in Parkinson's disease as you all
are aware are tremor or trembling in hands, arms, legs, jaw, and face,
rigidity or stiffness of the limbs, slowness of movement and impaired
balance. Prof Varadan has devised a wireless system for monitoring
and control of Parkinson's disease. The system consists of an implantable
DNA insert in the head region for generating a pulse to the nerve
system controlled either by a modified pacemaker or smart hat. Passive
polymer-based gyro sensors are implanted in the tremor location. The
sensor gets the power from the pacemaker and the pacemaker then
reads the tremor motion. The pacemaker then generates the pulse in
the implanted device in the head to control the tremor. This appears
to be a promising line of treatment for such diseases. Prof. Varadan
also has reported that the few patients affected by Parkinson's disease
had a full recovery. I would suggest that this International Centre can
work with Prof Varadan's group for evolving solutions for Parkinson's
disease through collaborative research.
Open heart surgery to replace the diseased heart valves with
prosthesis has become a common modality for treatment. Recent
research has brought out bio-prosthetic heart valve implants and this
has been found successful in clinical trials. This is the promising area
of research in view of the cost consideration and also due to anti
coagulation properties. Another area of research is development of
284 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
cardiac homograft. Also, there is a need to standardize the homograft
and genograft through decellularisation procedure which may eventually
lead to the development of autografts. I am happy that the Centre will
be progressing research in all these front line areas of research. I would
suggest that this Centre can work in collaboration with All India Institute
of Medical Sciences, Delhi, Sri Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical
Sciences and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram and other leading
medical institutions in the country.
The convergence of bioscience and IT into Bioinformatics has
given the thrust to researchers for genomics-based drug discovery
and development. Pressure is mounting on the pharmaceutical
companies to reduce or at least control costs, and have a growing
need for new informatics tools to help manage the influx of data from
genomics, and turn that data into tomorrow's drugs. Indian IT industry
has a tremendous opportunity in the drug development.
In computational biology the most expensive investment is in
the software for drug analysis, modelling and design. These investments
at times are of the order of several hundreds of thousands of dollars
and thus the computational biology had gone beyond the reach of
many colleges and universities and also small scale start-ups. However
many academic institutions including the Indian Institute of Science
and CSIR laboratories have already built up the capability to develop
the software, but nevertheless lacked the infrastructure to convert this
software into a product. The New Millennium Indian Technology
Leadership Initiative (NMITLI), CSIR had pioneered the efforts to
develop a world class software package called Bio-Suite using TCS,
one of our software industry and academic institutions. Bio-Suite is a
state-of-the-art software package that caters to all aspects of
computational biology from genomics to structure-based drug design.
It incorporates the latest publicly known algorithms, as chosen by
our panel of academic partners, and has been coded entirely by the
Indian software team, using the best software engineering practices.
It can be used by academic and R&D institutions, small/medium
biotechnology companies at an affordable cost but with the functionality
of well-known world class software. I would suggest the International
Centre for Biomedical Sciences and Technology (Research, Training
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 285
and Application) make use of this and contribute for the further
development in this direction.
I note that most medical equipment have considerable component
of computers and peripherals whose cost has been plummeting in the
open market. But, the cost of medical equipment and the services has
not been coming down at the same pace as we see in ICT. India is
well poised with its excellent ICT and health care base to work towards
a world cause to make modern services such as MRI, CT Scan and
others, affordable by the poor. The specifications and acceptance
standards for these equipment and services can be laid down by an
expert committee. They can also ensure that the regulations and clinical
validation procedures do not become a hindrance but instead help in
getting these products developed and marketed in a time-bound manner.
This will open up the entire world market to Indian products.
The International Centre for Biomedical Sciences and
Technology's training wing will be generating a cadre of physician
assistants who will be a vital professional link between the doctors
and paramedics. These personnel will be extremely useful for promoting
health care delivery system in the rural areas. This Centre should
create a growth plan for this cadre by enlarging their scope of work
in research areas with their innate clinical experience so that they can
eventually aspire to become scientists. This will need discussion in a
common forum of institutions where similar training facilities are
being offered. With this model, it is essential to build education and
employment generation in the rural sector.
We need good hearts to treat the ailing hearts, we need helping
hands to remove the pain, and we need beautiful minds to give happiness
to the patients. In this context, I would like to recall a poem. I would
like to share with you the essence of it.
When God first created the human being, it took millions and
millions of years to get the right shape. He went on experimenting
and finally he realized the shape he wanted. Once realized, he gave
life. First the man said, "I thank you, Almighty." Second thing he
did, he smiled at God. Almighty was very happy, that his creation
has done two good things. Then, God was preoccupied for some time,
286 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
later when God looked at the man he found something is missing in
him. He created the fire in milli-seconds and created Shaitan out of
fire. He asked Shaitan to prostrate before the first human being that
he created in his image. The Shaitan refused to prostrate. He said,
"Oh! Almighty you have created me out of fire, I am a superior creation".
The God was taken aback. He thought for a while and decided to
integrate the man and Shaitan into one single system, that is the human
race what we are. If we want to become close to Almighty God, let
our mind and hand be kind to human beings who are suffering with
pain. That means we have defeated the Shaitan within us. The question
is who will defeat whom? May God bless you to be close to God's
image and the Shaitan gets defeated. Your kindness will flow through
your actions, thousands and thousands of patients will be relieved of
the heart pain and they will say "Thank you doctor" with the smile.
That means you are in God's image.
Nano-Science for Treatment of Cancer
and Brain Related Diseases
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in the presentation of Ranbaxy
Research Awards for the years 2002 and 2003. My greetings to
the organizers, members of the Ranbaxy Science Foundation, scientists,
researchers, chemists, educationists, industrialists and distinguished
guests. My congratulations to all the award winners for their important
contributions in the area of medical research. It is observed that Ranbaxy
Research Foundation is one of the busiest research foundations and
has been regularly conducting scientific meets and conferences in
front line areas of research and current problems of public health.
These conferences would have provided research direction for the
scientists and enabled the pharmaceutical industries to provide cost-
effective drugs to the needy. The research thrust and original drug
formulations are very important in view of WTO norms coming into
effect by the year 2005. I visualize our medical research teams in
India will take up the challenge of developing molecules to drug leading
to value added production and marketing.
Indian population is highly susceptible to coronary heart diseases,
that too at a relatively young age irrespective of where they live. As
you are aware, Gene Chip arrays have tremendous potential to reach
goals from identifying genetic variations associated with heart disease
for discovering new drug targets.
Recently, I was in Chennai at Dr. Cherian's Medical Centre. It
is known as International Centre for Biomedical Sciences and
Technology (Research & Applications). There I interacted with Dr.
Address during the presentation of Ranbaxy Research Awards for the Years 2002 and
2003, New Delhi, 8 October 2004
288 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Emmanuel, who is working in the area of Gene Chip. He says the
Gene Chip can be used for finding the existence of genetic diseases
including coronary artery diseases in the baby during a certain stage
As many as 50 different mutated genes are identified as responsible
for heart problems in Indian population. If a person is not having any
of these harmful mutated genes, then he may not suffer from heart
ailments. The Gene Chip is one which, on contacting with the blood,
immediately identifies the mutated genes in the person. Based on
this information, proper guidance can be given to the patients and
parents. The chip could also be modified to adjust to the patient's
system to develop those chemicals which in turn will help the patient
recover from the present situation.
It is reported that gene differences between humans and most
animals are very nominal. More than 90% of our DNA is similar.
This property is a boon to researchers since animal models can be
subsequently used for curing human diseases based on trial data. It
has also been found that Gene Chips can be used for early diagnosis
of tumors and their treatment. Integrating molecular biology,
cytogenetics and biochemistry, bio-chip technology is regarded as
one of the greatest inventions in the research of gene functions. It is
far superior to molecular biological technology in terms of speed and
accuracy. I would recommend to the medical researchers to progress
further in this area for finding the application of Gene Chip as a
diagnostic tool and as a treatment regime for many diseases.
When I visited Chattisgarh recently, I was informed by the various
authorities that sickle cell anaemia disease is widely prevalent in tribal
areas there and even in the adjoining States. I understand over 25
lakh population suffers from this disease. Life expectancy of this
population is quite low and it is reported that this disease is a silent
Sickle cell disease is an inherited condition. Two genes for the
sickle haemoglobin must be inherited from one's parents in order to
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 289
have the disease. A person who receives a gene for sickle cell disease
from one parent and a normal gene from the other has a condition
called sickle cell trait. Sickle cell trait produces no symptoms or problems
for most people. Sickle cell disease can neither be contracted nor
passed on to another person. The severity of sickle cell disease varies
tremendously. Some people with sickle cell disease lead lives that
are nearly normal. Others are less fortunate, and can suffer from a
variety of complications. The available treatment strategies can be
divided into anti-sickling agents, vasoactive drugs, bone marrow
transplantation and gene therapy. Recently I came across in the internet,
Dr. Eric Kmiec, an Associate Professor of Microbiology and
Immunology at Thomas Jefferson University had shown that the new
gene repair technology may hold promise as a treatment for sickle
cell anaemia and other diseases by correcting the DNA mutation from
which they arise. I would recommend to the medical scientists to
apply their mind collectively to find a preventive and post-occurrence
cost-effective treatment for this dreaded disease. I would even suggest
to Ranbaxy Medical Research group to get in touch with Thomas
Jefferson University for finding a fast, cost-effective diagnostic method
and treatment for this disease.
When I was a Professor at Anna University in Chennai before
taking up this present assignment, apart from my teaching activities
on various societal transformation missions, I was guiding a doctoral
research project. My student's name is Rev. Father George A. The
research was aimed to find integrated solution using a software, hardware
application to achieve a near normal functioning of the brain of mentally
challenged children. When 1 saw some of the mentally challenged
children performing certain activities like singing, painting in Central
Institute of Mental Retardation, Thiruvananthapuram, I got convinced
that one day convergence of information and communication
technology, medical electronics, biotechnology and mathematical
simulation can find a solution for their problem. We have been studying
the mentally challenged children in various research institutions, homes
for mentally retarded and hospitals. We are confident that it will be
290 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
possible to transform the functions of the damaged portion of the
brain, say left hemisphere, to the normal portion, right hemisphere of
the brain by some triggering mechanism, or by implanting a bio-chip
to carry out those functions. This is a complex problem which needs
an integrated approach involving medical scientists and technologists
for a targeted permanent solution which can help children afflicted
with this mental disability.
A newer input has come to us recently through which the genes
responsible for determining the chemical ingredients which create
the mentally challenged state in the children could be identified. Then
the Gene Chip can identify the responsible genes present in the parents
and the children. Taking a blood sample, the chip should also suggest
that the production of such and such chemical should be beneficial to
the patient. The chip could suggest, which signals if sent would induce
the brain to synthesize the required chemicals. Such signals should
then be sent, by the external fittings like a cell phone apparatus, to
the brain. The required signals can be tested out on a culture of neuron.
The signals sent by the chip, or advised by the chip, should help the
brain to make those chemical ingredients to make these goals achieved.
When we started our research, it looked as if for solving the problem
we were nowhere. But today, we have many methods of solutions
coming from many researchers. Now we have to synthesize a solution
leading to non-invasive treatment regime.
The recent identification and characterization of progenitors with
stem cell properties has opened up new avenues that may be useful
for treating functional impairments caused by the death of specific
cell population. The stem cell may help restore functioning of certain
defective organs, by repopulating or rescuing the damaged cells from
further degeneration. There will be a revolution in the medical treatment
for heart care, cancer, visually impaired and mentally challenged. It is
essential to launch an integrated national stem cell research programme.
During my visit to various laboratories, I happened to see the
beginning of stem cell research for different purposes including brain
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 291
research. I would like to share with you two very important stem cell
research applications in the field of cardiology and visual impairment.
When I met Dr. P. Venugopal, a famous cardiac surgeon, he told me
about his experiences. He said in one of the cardiac diseases, where
conventional, medical and surgical treatments were ineffective because
of the affliction of the heart muscle, use of autologous bone marrow
stem cells implantation into the diseased heart muscles had been applied
in order to improve the function of the heart muscle. This kind of
application of this procedure is the latest and very few cases have
been done in the world, the first time in India. This is expected to
open new frontiers in the treatment of patients for regeneration of
heart muscles, thereby giving new hope for the patients suffering from
end stage heart disease. The stem cells are being tried in other diseases
like diabetes in order to offer cure for the patients suffering from
long term and intractable diabetes. This is being applied by injecting
the stem cells into the patient's artery supplying the pancreas. The
results are still awaited. The New Scientist (dated 25th September)
has reported another remarkable recovery of a heart patient at the
John Wolfgong Goethe University at Frankfurt. Of course for the
first time, I have come across a warning, stating that risk is very high.
Against stem cell solution for every aspect of human disease, it is
reported that large amount of tests on animals is needed before applying
The Stem Cell technology is at the cutting edge, practised by no
more than three or four centres across the globe. It involves the harvesting
of stem cells from the limbus of the eye and explant - culturing them
such that the resultant material can be used to reconstruct the damaged
outer surface of the eye, thus enabling it to better accept a corneal
graft. The L. V. Prasad Eye Institute has succeeded in translating this
technology from the Petri dish to the patient's eye. Such advanced
technologies need to be effectively deployed to provide critical eye
care to the majority of the population. When I recently visited LV
Prasad Eye Institute, Prof. Taraprasad Das showed me the results of
vision recovery of about 150 patients affected by fire accidents. Here
I would like to suggest to medical researchers in India to take up a
mission mode stem cell research taking into account all aspects.
292 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
As we have discussed Gene Chip and Stem Cell research for
many diseases relevant to India, we have to recognize that another
potential area of research of nano-science has already entered into
diagnosis and treatment, particularly diseases relating to brain and
cancer. It is predicted that nano-robots will carry diagnostic probe
and treatment solutions. Finally the robots will get digested in the
human system. Sometimes I feel the world may declare the early phase
of twenty-first century, as a century of nano-science research and
technology leading to revolution in human life enrichment.
Technology brings Smiles to
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in the dedication ceremony
of Polytechnic of Spastics Society of Karnataka. I greet the
organizers, members of the spastic society, doctors, paramedical staff,
medical technologists, NGOs and other distinguished invitees.
It is estimated that in India the disabled persons constitute 5%
of the total population. I would request the Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment to work out the statistics within a year. The holistic
rehabilitation of these persons involves a multi-sectoral approach and
creation of a condition in which they can fully realize their potential
and live their lives independently and work and contribute. Presently
it is estimated that less than 20% of the disabled population alone are
brought under the purview of rehabilitation schemes. Majority of the
disabled who are not receiving any rehabilitation aid or advice belong
to the rural sector and they remain only under parental care and suffer
the pain all through their lives. It is necessary to have counselling for
the parents and relatives of the disabled and motivate them to come
forward to seek the help of specialist agencies who can assist them in
getting the right supportive devices and general/vocational training
for their wards. In addition to providing vocational training, it is essential
for government and non-governmental agencies to give psychological
training for 3 to 6 months to create a spirit of "We can do it, we will
win" among the disabled persons. Combination of vocational training
and the higher efforts of the disabled persons will generate the
indomitable spirit. I would like to share with you some of my thoughts
on this crucial human welfare mission of "Indomitable spirit".
Address at the Dedication of Polytechnic of Spastic Society of Karnataka, Bangalum,
294 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
I consider that the perception of disability lies in the mind. Surely
a person with a pure and enlightened mind is a valuable citizen
irrespective of whether he is physically disabled or not. The life of a
disabled person can be enriched through creation of indomitable spirit
in him/her. I would like to share one example of an individual who
has excelled in his field with all the disabilities.
During my visit to Bulgaria in 2003,1 visited National Art Gallery
of Bulgaria. There I saw an exhibition of paintings, mostly done by
Bulgarian painters which inspired and impressed me. I also saw 100th
birth anniversary exposition of the famous Bulgarian artist Zlatju
Bojadjiev. Hundreds of paintings were done by him using the right
hand as is normally done. I was told that his right hand subsequently
was paralyzed. But the indomitable spirit in him, made him paint
using his left hand and these more beautiful paintings were also
displayed. That struck me, that constructive people cannot be hampered
by a physical defect, as the power comes from inside to make one to
go ahead with the mission of his life.
I would like to suggest a few societal and technological support
missions needed for making disabled persons to live near normal life.
One of the important concerns is to provide easy accessibility to
public buildings, schools, colleges, banks, transport etc. I understand
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation has made proper provisions for the
benefit of those who are physically challenged. We should make all
efforts to provide conducive working environment with easy
accessibility. A tripartite approach to handle, educate and empower
the disabled has to be in place with the assistance of parents, teachers
and social service/health care agencies. Technological and industrial
partners in this effort should aim at providing affordable devices and
We have to make efforts to ensure that disabled persons get equal
opportunities and they do not remain isolated in the society. We have
to provide "equalization of opportunity" for persons with disabilities
by providing seemingly simple, basic, and obvious services as access
ramps and sidewalk indentations for the convenience of the disabled
people. We need to realize the fact that this society is for all,
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 295
encompassing human diversity and leading to development of the
human potential in each person.
Assistive devices can often minimize handicaps. While we have
developed many new and useful items, we need to pay attention to
quality as well as affordable cost. Research and development in this
field is vital. We must harness Information Technology to improve
access to the printed word for persons with visual impairment. While
text in English can be scanned, transferred to the computer and heard
through voice software, this facility is not yet available for the Indian
languages at the speed and sophistication of English language. While
material in English can easily be transcribed into Braille, this facility
is not available for many of the Indian languages. Consequently,
availability of text books and other reading materials in the Indian
languages in Braille is scarce and production is expensive and time
consuming. I suggest to the IT community to device a Braille keyboard
with the necessary software to convert the Braille input into text and
speech in the Indian languages.
When I was in Kolkata interacting with 9000 children at the
Netaji Indoor Stadium, one boy suffering from visual impairment
asked me, "Sir, what kind of education facilities are provided in the
Knowledge Society, for visually handicapped children like me?" There
are many like him. Let me share one thought with you. I had met
many physically and mentally challenged children, visiting Rashtrapati
Bhavan and also during my visits to various States and different
countries. My belief all along was reconfirmed that these children
like all others have an equal urge to pursue their studies and work.
We have to provide solutions to their problems with the aid of
Information Technology, by developing audio books, talking websites,
voice assistive interfaces and other devices. We should launch
programmes with IT institutions for developing aids for the visually
handicapped at an affordable cost.
A seven year old boy wrote to me from Belgaum that he lost
both his legs in an accident and sought my help. The boy was attended
to by my friends who are specialist doctors and engineers. They took
it as a mission to make the boy walk. They brought the technology of
296 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
light weight FROs and made the mission a success. The whole of
Belgaum was ecstatic and approached my friends to help many more
such needy children. DRDO and NIMS with the help of the local
Lion's Club facilitated fitment of light weight FROs to 315 polio
affected children. This incident made me to visit Belgaum. I witnessed
the beautiful scene of how human hearts of technologists and scientists
have been touched by challenges of the young children.
I visualize a scene in which some of the disabled have to become
part of the Internet culture. Lack of access to the right information at
the right time is a bothering concern for the disabled. Information
and Communication Technology (ICT) will provide solution to make
Internet friendly towards differently challenged individuals enabling
them to benefit from the awesome power of the Internet. Physical
mobility of the disabled may be minimized or eliminated by the virtual
office concepts in which people are allowed to work from their homes
through computers and deliver their work output to their offices online.
Even while we work towards such near-futuristic possibilities, we
should also try to provide existing services for the disabled. For example,
why not provide mobile telephones at a lower cost to those who are
disabled as they need it the most for regular work and his/her safety?
When I was a Professor at Anna University in Chennai before
taking up this present assignment, apart from my teaching activities
on various societal transformation missions, I was guiding a doctoral
research project. My student's name is Rev. Father A.K. George. The
research was aimed to find integrated solution using a software-hardware
application to achieve a near normal functioning of the brain of mentally
challenged children. When I saw some of the mentally challenged
children performing certain activities like singing, painting in Central
Institute of Mental Retardation, Thiruvananthapuram, I got convinced
that one day convergence of information and communication
technology, medical electronics, bio-technology and mathematical
simulation can find a solution for their problem. We have been studying
the mentally challenged children in various research institutions, homes
for mentally retarded and hospitals. We are confident that it will be
possible to transform the functions of the damaged portion of the
brain, say left hemisphere, to the normal portion, right hemisphere,
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELL ARE 297
of the brain by some triggering mechanism, or by implanting a bio
chip to carry out those functions. This is a complex problem which
needs an integrated approach involving medical scientists and
technologists for a targeted permanent solution which can help children
afflicted with this mental disability. A newer input has come to us
recently through which the genes responsible for determining the
chemical ingredient which create the mentally challenged state in the
children could be identified. Then the Gene Chip can identify the
responsible genes present in the parents and the children. Taking a
blood sample, the chip should also suggest that the production of
such and such chemical should be beneficial to the patient. The chip
could suggest which signals, if sent, would induce the brain to synthesize
the required chemicals. Such signals should then be sent by the external
fittings, like a cell phone apparatus, to the brain. The required signals
can be tested out on a culture of neuron. The signals sent by the chip
or advised by the chip, should help the brain to make those chemical
ingredients to make these goals achieved. When we started our research,
it looked as if for solving the problem we were nowhere. But today,
we have many methods of solutions coming from many researchers.
Now we have to synthesize a solution leading to non-invasive treatment
In every sphere of life, women with disabilities are very high.
The unemployment rate for disabled women is phenomenally high.
Government and social organisations, educational institutions and
industry have to work together and evolve methods for removing the
high unemployment of women having disability and bring them into
the mainstream of life by building capacity in them to make useful
contribution to nation building tasks.
Rehabilitation process should aim at enabling persons with
disabilities to reach and maintain their optimal physical, sensory,
intellectual, psychological and/or social functional levels, thus providing
them with the tools to change their lives towards a higher level of
independence. Rehabilitation process has to include measures to provide
and/or restore functions, or compensate for the loss or absence of a
function or for a functional limitation. It should include a wide range
of measures and activities from more basic and general rehabilitation
298 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
to goal-oriented activities, for instance vocational rehabilitation. The
most important need is to enlist people as support group personnel
who have love and passion for serving others. Polytechnic for Inclusive
Education created by the Spastic Society of Karnataka will meet the
rehabilitation needs of the differently abled children. I understand it
will cater to the needs of members of the community who have
neurological impairment, hearing impairment, different abled persons
with communication disorders, persons with multiple disabilities and
physical disabilities. In addition their classmates would be students
who have passed out from regular educational establishments and
who do not have obvious disabilities. This type of inclusive atmosphere
will enable the differently abled children nearly normal. At this point
I would like to share my experience during my visit to Tanzania in
September. There I visited a school named Uhuru Mchanganyiko
Primary School which had inclusive training for the disabled children
of different age groups and different disabilities. I was told that the
children were really happy in this integrated environment and their
learning ability got enhanced substantially.
I would like to explain an incident which took place in Rashtrapati
Bhavan. On 27th November 2003. I met about 1000 differently
challenged children, who were taking part in the Abilympics. They
were extremely enthusiastic to visit Rashtrapati Bhavan and the
environment gave them happiness. To that gathering, I recited a small
poem, which runs like this:
We are all God's children,
Our minds are stronger than diamond.
We will win, win, win with our mighty will.
God is with us; who can be against!
On hearing this, a boy from Iran by name Mustafa came to me;
he didn't have both legs and was fitted with artificial limbs. He thrust
a paper in my hand. He had written a beautiful poem titled "Courage",
in Persian language. It reads like this:
"I don't have legs. My mind says: Don't weep, don't weep. For,
I need not bow even in front of a King." I was really moved by the
positive thinking of that boy. It shows his courage to face the life
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 299
with optimism. I am sure the Polytechnic for inclusive education will
provide the necessary vocational training and the emotional support
to the children for living a near normal life in our society. 1 would
now dedicate the Polytechnic for Inclusive Education established by
the Spastic Society of Karnataka to the nation.
We require an innovative and caring mind to provide productive
employment to the disabled persons. To achieve this, a committee of
experts including representatives from corporate and voluntary sectors
has identified around 120 occupations at executive/management/
supervisory levels and around 946 occupations at skilled/semi-skilled/
unskilled levels for employing disabled persons without compromising
on the quality of work. Organisations and industry should voluntarily
come forward to offer some of the occupations to the disabled so that
they can realize their economic independence and also have the
satisfaction of contributing to the cause of removing pain. Now the
call centres are becoming important business centres in the country.
With the minimum hardware changes through a short training
programme the call centres can employ a large number of visually
handicapped persons for efficient work in their establishments. I would
recommend to call centre institutions all over the country to facilitate
conduct of such courses for the disabled persons in mission mode
I wish you success and happiness in all your missions of providing
service to the humanity. May God bless you.
Eye Care - A Noble Mission
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of ORBIS
DC-10 Flying Eye Hospital programme organized by ORBIS
International India country programme. I greet the organizers,
ophthalmologists, foreign delegates, distinguished medical practitioners
and distinguished guests on this occasion.
I appreciate the airborne pioneering service rendered by ORBIS
DC-10 Flying Eye Hospital during the last two decades. I understand
ORBIS came to India for the first time in 1988 and worked in Hyderabad
and New Delhi. The Flying Eye Hospital(FEH) provided an enabling
environment for training and actual treatment for some of the eye
care professionals from India. Since then there has been a number of
visits by ORBIS and today it has a dedicated mission for mitigating
avoidable childhood blindness and corneal blindness in the country.
I would like to discuss the topic "Eye Care is a Noble Mission".
Over the last two decades, India has made significant advances
in eye care and it is recognized as one of the leaders in eye care. India
has sixteen "Child Sight Centres" spread in different parts of the country
of which twelve are developed by ORBIS. The country recognizes
this important contribution by ORBIS and its dedicated team of doctors.
I had a discussion with Dr. Gullapalli Nageswara Rao, President
of International Agency for the Prevention of Blindness - Vision 2020,
whose mission is to remove blindness from the world.
There are nearly 50 million blind people in the world today and
150 million with low vision. Out of this 200 million, 12 million are
in India and the number in rural areas accounts for 8.4 million. How
to address this problem?
Address at the inauguration of ORBIS DC-10 Flying Eye Hospital Programme, New
Delhi, 10 March 2005
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 301
The pyramid model as focused by Dr.G.N. Rao involves creation
of a four-tier system of treatment namely primary, secondary, tertiary
and advanced tertiary care. In India, we have 20% vision centres for
primary care, 70% service centres for secondary care, 50% training
centres for tertiary care and 25% centres of excellence. We need to
double the investment to provide full complement of eye care facility
for all the four sectors with participating eye centres, government
agencies and international partners like ORBIS.
As you are all aware, blindness is predominantly an age-related
problem, with the prevalence rising from childhood to old age. It is
estimated that 5 out of every 100 persons over 60 years of age are
blind and that 7 out of 1000 people in the world are blind. It has been
roughly estimated that the direct cost of blindness to our society is of
the order of $ 25 billion per year whereas only $92 million are needed
every year to control the three major causes of blindness. Therefore,
we can see that the prevention of blindness is one of the most cost-
effective public health interventions which are available in the field
of health care. To this end, the efforts of initiatives like those being
made by ORBIS Flying Eye Hospital will help the community at large
to gain from the rapid advances being made in the field of eye care
and to reduce the costs to our society from this affliction. Normally,
low vision people tend to lose sight if it is not taken care of at the
right time. All the national eye care centres and ORBIS have to focus
more on treating in large scale low vision people in time with
In India, we have a National Programme for the Control of
Blindness which was started in the year 1976. The programme aims
to reduce the prevalence of blindness from 1.4 % to 0.3 %. The main
objectives of this programme are to develop eye-care infrastructure
throughout the country and to build institutional capacity for eye care
with expansion into underserved areas. An important component of
this national programme is also to develop the human resource capacity
for eye care at all levels. It is in this context that the training programme
of ORBIS will facilitate quality service delivery by empowering,
equipping and building human resource capacity of different
organisations connected with the field of eye care in India.
302 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
ORBIS India Programme focuses on capacity building and
advocacy. Capacity building includes training and upgradation of skills
of ophthalmologists and paramedics, eye care managers and eye care
finance management. Advocacy includes initiation and implementation
of vision 2020 programmes, strengthening Govt, hospitals, generating
and mobilizing funds for blindness eradication programmes, supporting
training programmes and influencing change in medical education
Although, the role of the DC-10 plane is limited to cities like
Delhi and Chennai which have very good standards of eye care, the
plane serves a larger purpose of creating awareness of eye care, training
of ophthalmologists, establishing international norms of nursing and
operation room standards by training nurses and paramedics. Along
with the ORBIS programmes, National Workshops on Corneal and
Childhood Blindness are also being arranged with involvement of
Govt, and NGO bodies to formulate policies for the country. A local
host committee invites the plane and NPCB (National Programme
for Control of Blindness) is supporting the DC-10 programme.
Along with this I understand that ORBIS is going to create eye
care centres in Patna, Sitapur, Ahmedabad and Bhopal in collaboration
with Rajendra Prasad Eye Care Centre of All India Institute of Medical
Sciences. I would suggest early action be taken to commission these
centres which will go a long way in providing eye care to these needy
Recently, there was a meeting of cured ophthalmic patients, their
doctors and a few social workers. One important result was discussed.
The relationship between the patient and doctor extends to patient's
family and doctor in medical care. This in turn transmits effective
messages from one family to another family on advice to prevent the
diseases, necessity of periodic checks, the dietary habits and the need
for lifestyle changes including eye exercises for good health. Actually,
I believe this good contact between the doctor and patients is comparable
to that of a teacher and student. I request every ophthalmologist to
play the role of a teacher in advising every family and visiting friends,
on eye disease prevention and methods to maintain quality vision. I
hope you all will find time for this noble action.
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 303
I woufcT suggest the following three missions be taken up by
ORBIS to promote eye care in India.
(1) So far ORBIS has not been undertaking low vision services.
I would suggest that a low vision service should be one of
the prime areas for ORBIS during the next five years with
partnership from national eye care agencies.
(2) Airborne Ophthalmic Services can be multiplied with co
operation between India's eye care centres, ORBIS services
and ISRO through a tele-eye care mission. It should be
launched in the nation say in 200 centres particularly in the
rural areas in north, east and west. This involves tele
connectivity through satellite communication in partnership
with the eye care community. I suggest the International
Agency for the Prevention of Blindness and Airborne
Ophthalmic Hospital and Ophthalmic Centre can work
together in this mission.
(3) The national eye care agency in collaboration with ORBIS
DC-10 programme can consider an airborne, road borne and
mobile eye care service for difficult regions in the country.
My best wishes to all the members of the ORBIS team for success
in their mission of eradicating blindness internationally.
Mission for Total Eradication of Leprosy
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the Annual General Meeting of
the Hind Kusht Nivaran Sangh (HKNS). I greet the Chairman and
Members of the Hind Kusht Nivaran Sangh. I have chosen the topic
for discussion in this meeting as "Mission for total eradication of
I am happy to note that the total number of patients has come
down from 4 million to 0.3 million during the period 1981-2004. Is
it true? I congratulate the Hind Kusht Nivaran Sangh for making some
contributions in achieving this result within the constraint of limited
resources. However, I find the 70% of the total leprosy patients are
concentrated in five major states Bihar, UP, West Bengal, Orissa and
Chattisgarh. Concerted efforts are needed for diagnosing the causes
for this situation and developing strategies by which we can bring
this down to the level of less than one leprosy case per ten thousand
population before the year 2005. It is essential that this should be
done positively and should not be further shifted. This Sangh must
enable implementation of the programme and monitor it. Also, there
is a need to work out methods by which we will be in a position to
rehabilitate the treated patients. By doing this we will be fulfilling at
least one of the dreams of Mahatma Gandhi.
I was studying the efforts made by Gujarat for leprosy elimination,
disability care and rehabilitation of leprosy patients. They have carried
out a comprehensive programme in which the state government medical
colleges, hospitals and non-government organisations have become
active partners. Based on the needs of particular districts they have
carried out reconstructive surgery camps and mega camps to treat
large number of patients. The micro planning for achieving the
Address at the Annual General Meeting of Hind Kusht Nivaran Sangh at Vishwa
Yuvak Kendra, New Delhi, 2 May 2005
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 305
elimination integrated with the disability care enable targeted elimination
of leprosy in States. I would suggest to plastic surgeons to come
forward and enable free skin grafting and tissue regeneration for cured
Also a number of NGOs have sponsored the treated leprosy patients
for training them in handicrafts and cottage industries, so that they
can find productive employment in their villages or they could find
self-employment opportunities towards rehabilitation. This model can
be followed in UP, Bihar, Maharashtra and West Bengal.
I was studying the case of a person who had turned a new leaf in
his life. He was also presented with the President's Award for the
"Best Self-Employed Person". This being a great achievement in itself,
his struggle was praiseworthy as he has risen above ostracism and
the stigma of being a leprosy patient.
After 7 years of treatment in a Welfare and Rehabilitation Centre
for Leprosy Patients, he is fully cured and runs his own telephone
booth at a City Railway Station. This model should be followed by
other rehabilitation centres in the country to make the treated leprosy
patients feel normal to function in the society. All our NGOs should
study such cases and provide treatment and rehabilitation with
compassion. NGOs can make use of the rehabilitated patients to work
on leather-craft, tailoring, printing, knitting and software units. I had
visited Raphael, the Ryder Cheshire International centre at Dehra
Dun where an NGO is actively involved in rehabilitating leprosy,
tuberculosis patients and also arranging education including skill
imparting education of the children of leprosy patients. It is essential
that cured patients must be integrated with the society. Social isolation
is deadlier than the disease.
Early detection of the disease is essential in order to avoid
permanent nerve damage and deformities. This will need survey of
the population and detection. We need to educate the population about
facts, the signs and cure for leprosy.
Multiple Drug Therapy (MDT) a combination of the anti-leprosy
drugs such as rifampicin, clofazimine and dapsone has been found to
306 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
be a very effective treatment of the disease. This can be followed by
government and non-government agencies working in treatment plans.
Patients who have developed deformities/disabilities would need special
care in providing suitable jobs which will ensure non-recurrence of
the disease and also does not cause discomfort while working.
In endemic districts domiciliary treatment should be provided
through staff trained in leprosy. For this purpose states who have
successfully combated leprosy could help other states to follow their
model. In moderate and low endemic districts treatment can be done
through mobile leprosy clinics. We should organize health education
to the patients, their families and the community to increase awareness
and to remove the stigma among the treated patients. Religious leaders
must clearly say that leprosy is not a communicable disease and patients
should be treated as normal human beings, during their discourses.
This should become the essential part of rehabilitation. Deformity
and ulcer care should become the part of the rehabilitation plan. NGO
working in difficult area could make use of this strategy effectively
for eradicating the leprosy in a time-bound manner.
Real cure for elimination of leprosy lies in development of the
region, that means developing the district, and the state. The development
approach would provide for the people better amenities, clean drinking
water, better hygiene and sanitation, better education and awareness,
better health care, and nutritious food resulting in livable environment.
This holistic approach is the vital need for eliminating leprosy in
endemic regions apart from the symptomatic cure being provided to
existing cases. I would recommend the state governments in participation
with non-governmental organisations to identify the endemic districts
and initiate developmental measures.
Presently, I understand that there are 285 voluntary organizations
actively engaged in Leprosy Relief Services. These organizations
are multi-functional. Their activities include case detection, case
treatment, health education, referral, training, research and rehabilitation
services. As far as Hind Kusht Nivaran Sangh is concerned you are
mainly engaged in advocacy, co-ordination, information, education
and communication services. Let us examine how this process can be
The President presenting National award on Technology to Indian Oil Corporation at
a function in New Delhi on 30 June 2004
At the inauguration of the Golden Jubilee Celebrations of the Lalit Kala Academy in
New Delhi on 9 August 2004
Addressing the Nation on the eve of the Independence Day in New Delhi on 14
The President addressing Defence personnel at Campbell
Nicobar Islands) on 7 May 2005 Bay (Andaman &
The President presenting a set of books to the President of Zanzibar Mr. Amani Abeid
Karume in Zanzibar on 12 September 2004
Addressing the Indian Community in Zanzibar on 12 September 2004
The President at the inauguration of a Surgical Workshop on Cochlear Implantation
Programme in New Delhi on 5 November 2005
The President at the National Conference on Legal Empowerment "Unveiling Vision
India 2005-2010", and commemoration of National Legal Literacy Day in New
Delhi on 9 November 2005
The President being greeted at the inaugural session of the 11 National Water
Convention in New Delhi on 11 May 2005
The President with the Annual Sangeet Natak Akademi Fellowship and Award
winners for 2004 in New Delhi on 26 August 2005
The President going round the Pavilion of the Ministry of Power at IITF-2004 after
inaugurating it in New Delhi on 14 November 2004
The President being led in a ceremonial procession to the Central Hall of the
Parliament to address the Joint Session of the Parliament in New Delhi on 25
Inaugurating the "National Summit of NGOs of Rural India" in New Delhi on 25
The President addressing Defence personnels at Campbell Bay (Andaman &
Nicobar Islands) on 7 May 2005
The President meeting the differently abled children at Uhuru School in Dar-es-
Salaamon 13 September 2004
At a function releasing a commemorative coin to mark the 150th year of India Post
in New Delhi on 4 October 2004
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 307
intensified to detect leprosy cases so that they can be advised treatment.
In this regard, I appreciate the project undertaken by HKNS for involving
the school children in total population coverage for surveillance of
leprosy and Multiple Drug Therapy (MDT) compliance. This technique
can be used for faster detection of the cases through the involvement
of large number of school children studying in different parts of the
Since Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa, Chattisgarh, Maharashtra and
West Bengal account for 53% of the cases, I would recommend the
following action plan for eradication of leprosy in these six States by
(a) HKNS can prepare an action plan for faster detection of
leprosy cases using the children of all educational institutions
located in Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa, Chattisgarh, Maharashtra
and West Bengal as programme facilitators.
(b) The list of voluntary organizations working in Bihar,
Jharkhand, Orissa, Chattisgarh, Maharashtra and West Bengal
on leprosy eradication mission be compiled by HKNS.
(c) A joint meeting be organized by the Hon'ble Health Ministers
of all the voluntary organizations of these States for motivating
them and getting their commitment to eradicate the leprosy
in these six States in a time-bound manner. Also, the financial
requirement for the task can be worked out in consultation
(d) Based on this commitment, the Hon'ble Health Minister
can arrange a meeting between the Prime Minister and the
respective Chief Ministers / Governors of these States for
getting the concurrence and support for launching of this
mission in these States.
(e) A Specialist who has successfully worked in eradicating
leprosy in some other State may be appointed as the Mission
Director for this eradication programme.
(f) Funds required for this programme may be provided by the
Health Ministry and it can monitor the programme on half
yearly basis for providing the necessary mid-course correction.
308 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
The eradication of leprosy is a multi-dimensional task. It involves
an integrated approach from NGOs, medical institutions, hospitals,
rehabilitation institutions, development institutions, research institutions
and small scale industrial units to eradicate the occurrence of the disease
in a time-bound manner. I would request the participants in the
programme to work with the theme 'Let my brain remove the pain'
of the suffering community. Mission mode operation is required by
the Central Government, State Governments and all the agencies
working on leprosy eradication particularly in the States of Bihar,
Jharkhand, Orissa, Chattisgarh, Maharashtra and West Bengal which
account for about sixty per cent of the occurrence, so that the country
is free from this disease before 2005.
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in the dedication ceremony
of Sri Ramakrishna Institute of Oncology and Research. I greet
the organizers, distinguished doctors, guests and dedicated nursing
and paramedical staff on this important occasion. I appreciate the
missionary spirit and dedication of the institute team in providing
high quality and compassionate medical services and care to all sections
I would like to share a few experiences of people and their pain
and possible solution. Last year, I was at the Centre for Cellular &
Molecular Biology at Hyderabad. I met hundreds of young scientists
working on the genetic origin and manifestation of diseases, particularly
cancer. The young scholars very enthusiastically shared with me their
knowledge of molecular biology and cellular research. They told me
about the information encrypted on the DNA in the cell nucleus and
how both problems and solutions to the human lives reside on the
software that nature has embedded in each life it creates. In a way,
these young minds were dealing with the questions that were so far
confined in the domain of sages and philosophers.
Cancer, unlike many other diseases that come from the external
factors, like infections, lifestyles and other environmental and
physiological stressors, primarily emanates from within the cell. The
life software embedded in the DNA material gets mutated and starts
growing in a way that is not in-line with the surrounding cells. Many
times when immune systems are impaired, life turns against itself.
The tragedy becomes unfathomable when it happens too early.
Sometime back, I met one gentleman whose 6-year-old grand
child was on periodic blood transfusion for Thallesemia. The permanent
Address at the Sri Ramakrishna Institute of Oncology and Research, Coimbatore,
310 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
solution, doctors told me was a bone marrow transplant. The bone
marrow of the child was not matching even between siblings and the
parents. Unmatched bone marrow transplant is not done in India, I
was told, and even in the West it is undertaken only in experimental
situations. I met the child who was unaware of the time bomb that
was ticking inside him. I prayed for him, for that was the only thing I
could do. Today, standing before this gathering of cancer experts,
I think I must share with you my concern for these patients who live
under the shadow of uncertain life. What can we do to strengthen the
doctors' capabilities in such a situation? Research on stem cell holds
great promise. Maybe clinicians getting involved in this research will
lead to breakthrough. We have a shortage of Bone Marrow Transplant
facilities. Then there are emotional issues. When a person is diagnosed
with cancer, in addition to the treatment, psychological support is
needed in a big way. This support should be in the form of counselling
and spiritual strengthening. Patient should be advised not to despair
and retreat from the normal life. Courage to carry on with the life
should be reinforced by persons living around. It is seen that properly
supported by their families and friends, many cancer patients have
discovered their inner selves while valiantly facing onslaught of the
Treatment of cancer is very often multi-pronged involving unique
combinations of radiation, chemotherapy and surgery. Genetic
diagnosis can help to take good decisions while charting the course
of therapy. On the drug side, instead of looking for agents that kill
dividing cells, researchers are now looking for agents that encourage
cell to get destroyed. Inside a growing tumor, the blood supply can
be made to run short suffocating the deformed cells. Many drugs,
called angiogenic agents, are now being used. However most of these
drugs are imported and are very expensive. Industry-hospital-research
institution consortia need to be established to develop affordable
Chemotherapy is often hazardous. It ends up destroying healthy
cells in the vicinity and in the metabolic path of the targeted cancerous
ones. A firm in Pune has developed algorithms describing interaction
between normal cells, malignant cells and nutrients. The algorithms
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 311
also take into account the pharmaco-kinetics of the drug. Together
with inputs on patient's age, height and weight and the type and volume
of the tumor, the mathematical model can design an optimal drug
schedule, minimizing the side effects. The type and volume of tumor
can be automatically deduced by a combination of imaging and
laboratory investigations. PET scans offer powerful techniques in
this area. This is a good example of how advances in many disciplines
of science such as biomedical engineering, image processing, control
systems, mathematical modelling and pharmacology are helping in
the development of better and effective treatment for cancer patients.
Palliative care, also called comfort care, is primarily directed at
providing relief to a terminally ill person through symptom management
and pain management. In situations where the cure is a foregone
conclusion, availability of comfort and preservation of minimum
essential quality of life remains an issue. We have to evolve well-
rounded palliative care programmes to address mental health and
Palliative care is best delivered in home settings. Community
participation is therefore fundamental in organizing palliative care
services. We have very stringent narcotics laws, which have to be
reviewed in making available required chemicals to the palliative care
networks. I understand many otherwise committed and well-meaning
organisations are shying away due to this fear.
There are a number of hospitals providing cancer treatment in
different cities of the country. It will be useful to network these
cancer treatment centres enabling exchange of experiences among
specialists leading to the delivery of best possible treatment. This
type of interaction will also generate confidence among medical
community to undertake treatment of complex cancer cases. During
one of my visits I found that cancer centres have immunologists,
physiologists and psychologists working together. This model could
be followed by this institute to provide psychological support to the
patients facilitating faster recovery.
Availability of comprehensive cancer centres like Sri Ramakrishna
Institute of Oncology and Research is a significant step forward in
312 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
dealing with the most challenging health care problem of this region.
However, we need an active connectivity of general practitioners with
this centre to make a major impact in terms of reaching the needy as
well as helping them out. The mission of offering the best available
patient care, the most sophisticated education to physicians and patients
and being the leader in the cancer research is indeed a very challenging
task. This mission demands the highest of the human capabilities in
intelligence, innovation and perseverance.
It is also equally important that the general public is educated
about the health care risks of exposure to carcinogenic agents as a
result of lifestyles and habits. To this end, education of children on
this subject should begin as early as in the primary schools so that
children do not get initiated into bad habits and thus remain immune
from the impact of such disease. Let our new generation enjoy health
and prosperity and do not succumb to the needless waste of human
life. Cancer cure and cancer research are indeed twin challenges to
the medico and health care community. Challenge transforms into
mission of pain removal and thereby provides useful life that is close
I inaugurate the following facilities of Sri Ramakrishna Institute:
- the women cancer screening project,
- the Cancer alleviation and rehabilitation, and
- the 64 multi-slice CT Scan.
Providing Health Care in Rural Areas
J AM DELIGHTED to visit and interact with the Doctors, Researchers,
Paramedical Staff and other members of the International Centre
for Cardio Thoracic and Vascular Diseases at Parumala. My greetings
to all the participants of this Unit for your health and happiness.
Cardiac care is a vital health care area for Indian community. I
am happy to find that a high technology Cardio Thoracic and Vascular
Diseases Centre has been created in a remote Panchayat in Kerala
which is a dream for every rural Indian. This will be one of the models
which can serve many NGOs who are going to contribute to health
care in rural areas. It is also heartening to note that the Centre is
sending medical teams to remote villages located in this region for
screening the patients in the village itself. This is definitely a noble
Kerala with its tourism potential is an important destination for
medical tourism. This Centre here should cater to the needs of medical
tourists and also provide quality health care to the people living in
the rural area at an affordable cost. In this gathering I would like to
discuss on the "quality health care in rural areas". Since this hospital
is located in a rural area, I would like to suggest commissioning an
insurance model followed successfully in certain hospitals in Karnataka.
For providing comprehensive quality health care, we suggest
citizens make a contribution of about Rs.5/- per month and a matching
Government contribution of about Rs.5/-, which will lead to a
Consolidated Health Fund of Rs.one crore per month for a population
of ten lakh in certain rural clusters. The International Centre for Cardio
Thoracic and Vascular Diseases may consider promoting such a scheme
Address at the Parumala Unit of International Centre for Cardio Thoracic and Vascular
Diseases, Parumala, 29 July 2005
314 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
in the villages located around this area which will enable provision
of quality health care at an affordable cost for each of the villagers
who become partners in this scheme. The scheme can subsequently
be made applicable to ail the districts of Kerala by the Government.
This in my opinion is an extremely cost-effective method of providing
quality health care to our rural population. This unique Health Insurance
Model will include an Information Communications Technology-
assisted Medical Advisory System and Health Awareness Education
over and above quality medical and surgical treatment and services
to all the people.
Multi-dimensional solutions are available for management of the diseases
based on my discussion with experts. The solutions include medicinal
treatment using Statins, which lower the cholesterol in the blood by reducing
the production of cholesterol by the liver. Statins block the enzyme in the
liver responsible for making excess cholesterol
However, one has to be careful about the side effects and take
adequate precautions while treating the patients. The second is through
angiography and angioplasty using stents. Advancements in stents have
resulted in the introduction of drug-coated stents which hold a tremendous
promise in the near perfect treatment of coronary artery disease. I understand
that very soon we may have bio-degradable stents. The next generation
stents may be nano-stents. If the heart blockage is severe, valve defect
and death of cells in the heart due to less blood supply etc., surgical
intervention will be necessary.
We have all witnessed the treatment of cardiovascular disease moving
from very invasive to less invasive methods. In the seventies bypass surgery
was the big news, in the eighties it was balloon angioplasty and in the
nineties it was the stent.
Now, moving a step further is a totally non-invasive treatment -
External Counter Pulsation (ECP), a truly non-operative, non-
pharmaceutical, safe and effective treatment which has made big news
in the West. ECP is FDA (USA) approved and finds reference in
medical and cardiology textbooks. Many favourable articles have been
published in a number of reputed journals. The success of ECP can
be judged from the fact that in USA the insurance sector reported
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 315
that the reimbursement for ECP has gone up by 6 % whereas that of
other procedures like angioplasty, bypass surgery, etc. has come down
by 7%. Now the treatment is available in most of the leading hospitals
In India, ECP is available at Sibia Medical Centre, Ludhiana
besides Escort Heart Institute and Research Centre, New Delhi, Peoples
General Hospital, Bhopal, Jamnagar etc. I am happy that ECP facility
is being established at this centre also.
It is well known that following bypass surgery only 75% patients
are symptom free for 5 years or more and only 50% after 10 years or
more. The number of patients having recurrence after bypass, ballooning
and stenting is increasing and for them ECP is the only FDA approved
treatment available which is documented to increase blood supply to
the heart by 20-42%, to the brain by 22-26% and to the kidneys by
19%. ECP also increases heart's output. More patients now prefer
non-invasive treatments. With improved cerebral circulation patients
may notice improved memory, etc. This centre may like to study this
technique of ECP External Counter Pulsation for providing non-invasive
cardiac care in this region as a complementary treatment regime.
There is a need to propagate the importance of appropriate food
habits and lifestyle among the urban population to combat the situation
of increased occurrence of heart ailments. Hospitals in the country
should take proactive steps to counsel their clients in a family atmosphere
for ensuring reduction in this number in the years to come.
It has been reported that the repeated occurrence of heart ailments
is caused by diet, smoking, and lack of exercise and uncontrolled
diabetes. All these factors can be controlled by an appropriate life
style intervention. I have seen the change of lifestyle pattern practically
taking place in Global Hospital and Research Centre, Mount Abu.
There was a joint project of Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied
Sciences (DIPAS), DRDO and the Global Hospital and Research Centre
for studying the effect of "holistic lifestyle intervention" on the patients
suffering from Coronary Artery Diseases during the year 1997-98.
The project involved both Control Group and the Experimental Group.
The Control Group was subjected to conventional treatment whereas
316 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
the Experimental Group was supported by an intervention involving
low fat, high fibre vegetarian diet, aerobic exercises and meditation.
This three-dimensional psycho-physiological mind-body approach in
treating heart patients of the Experimental Group resulted in dissolution
of angiographic plaque and improvement in microcirculation of blood
in heart muscles of the patients. The treatment was also supported by
participation of spouses and other family members of the patients,
leading to a unique family system approach to Medicare.
During my visit to various laboratories in India, I happened to
see the beginning of stem cell research for different purposes including
brain research. I would like to share with you an important stem cell
research application in the field of cardiology. When I met Dr. P.
Venugopal, Director, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)
a famous cardiovascular and thoracic surgeon, he told me about his
experiences. He said in one of the cardiac diseases, where conventional
medical and surgical treatments were ineffective because of the affliction
of the heart muscle, use of autologous bone marrow stem cells
implantation into the diseased heart muscles had been applied in order
to improve the function of heart muscle. This kind of application of
this procedure is the latest and very few cases have been done in the
world, the first time in India. This is expected to open new frontiers
in the treatment of patients for regeneration of heart muscles, thereby
giving new hope for the patients suffering from end-stage heart disease.
I would request participation of many medical institutions in such a
promising area of research.
Cardiac researchers have to recognize another potential area of
research of nano-science which has already entered into diagnosis
and treatment of diseases, particularly relating to brain cancer and
heart. It is predicted that nano-robots will carry diagnostic probe and
treatment solutions. Finally the robots will get digested in the human
system after curing the disease. Sometimes I feel that the world may
declare the early phase of twenty-first century, as a century of nano
science research and technology leading to revolution in human life
enrichment. I would recommend to the Centre to take up research on
the application of drug delivery system using nano-technology.
Ranbaxy For Indian Traditional Medicine
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of New Research
& Development Centre of Ranbaxy. My greetings to the organizers,
pharma technologists, chemists, doctors, academicians, industrialists
and distinguished guests. I am happy to note that this R&D Centre is
the third centre being established by Ranbaxy at Gurgaon with a focus
on New Drug Development Research (NDDR) using New Chemical
Entities (NCEs). The Centre will work in Medicinal Chemistry,
Pharmacology, Infectious diseases, Bio-technology, Drug Metabolism,
Pharmacokinetics and Herbal Drug Research. At this stage, let me
pay my tributes to Dr. Parvinder Singh who had created a great vision
to Ranbaxy well before a decade to excel in the new era of global
competition and has enabled you to establish a number of units in different
parts of the world. Now I would like to discuss on certain research
areas that may lead India to achieve "Leadership in Pharma Industry".
As you all know Johns Hopkins University in USA is doing a
pioneering research work in medical field. I met Dr. Charles Cummings
of the Johns Hopkins Board and his team, some time back. I asked
one question that was in my mind, to Dr. Charles, "What made Johns
Hopkins a world class medical research centre in addition to its
cherishing societal missions?" His answer was, "it is a great tradition,
and it started with a number of visionaries with value system and
missions, working together. This tradition continues." I am sure this
R&D Centre of Ranbaxy can take a lead from the above model and
can become a pioneer in establishing a tradition of excellence in
drug research and success in global business.
Business symbolizes competitiveness. Competitiveness leads to
economic growth. Competitiveness is a single factor which will decide
Address at the New Research & Development Centre of Ranbaxy, Gurgaon, 16 August

318 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
India transforming into a developed nation. Technology powers the
competitiveness. Competitiveness leads to creation of a brand institution.
The new R&D Centre could be a unique research centre for enabling
Ranbaxy to become a global leader for certain classes of drugs. The
use of right technologies in R&D will bring in the right non-linear
growth in the pharma sector. When I visited Kiev, Ukraine recently,
I found rows of chestnut trees on both flanks of highways interspersed
with Ranbaxy boards. It was a beautiful sight to see. When I met the
members of Ranbaxy and other pharma industrial teams, I realized
that you are working under severe competition. I am sure the present
R&D work and global business development efforts will give you
additional technological strengths to meet this challenge.
From January 1st, 2005, the Indian pharma industry faces a
challenge of demanding indigenous design of drugs, which has a
profound impact on global competitiveness and business viability.
As India had come into compliance with the TRIPS protocol mandated
by the WTO, a new IPR regime is already in position. This extends
patent protection to new product inventions. The new product patent
regime will effect a sea change in the way Indian pharma companies
think and do business. I am sure the New Research & Development
Centre will enable RANBAXY to meet this challenge better; as firm
formulation of R&D based global business orientation has been made
by RANBAXY as a part of its vision.
A report on "Health Care in India" has been prepared by a panel
of leading doctors and medical technologists in the country. It reports
the typical problems facing us for two decades in the health care and
possible solutions through technology. The expert team has identified
three major diseases, viz. tuberculosis, HIV and water-borne diseases,
by next decade as methods to combat the diseases. This Health Vision
document was studied by Dr. Parvinder Singh with TIFAC team.
Ranbaxy took a decision to include disease-based drugs in their product
profile. Let us further discuss some of the emerging technologies,
which will have tremendous influence in the field of drug delivery.
India missed the great opportunity in partnering the human genome
project and thereby lost the utility of right type of data. I suggest to
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 319
the Indian biomedical community to take the initiative to become a
working partner in the proteomics project of gene characterization.
Proteomics is the study of all the proteins expressed by the genome
of a cell. It is the logical extension of genomics. Proteomics helps to
understand the basic biological processes critical to normal cellular
functions as well as the development of diseases. It identifies the
essential components of these processes and exploits these components
as targets in the development of new methods to prevent or treat diseases.
The national programme on proteomics has to be accelerated with
partnership from industries and R&D laboratories. I would suggest
that this should be pursued as a mission mode project. The proteomics
resulting into a gene chip can become the future diagnosis and treatment
regime for many diseases. The new R&D Centre of Ranbaxy must
be aware of the progress made in the proteomics programme and
understand the processes at the molecular level so that the genetic
characterization leads to forecasting and diagnosis of the disease for
adopting suitable preventive and curative measures.
Last year I visited Dr. Cherian's Medical Centre at Chennai. It
is known as International Centre for Biomedical Sciences and
Technology (Research & Applications). There I interacted with Dr.
Emmanuel, who is working in the area of Gene Chip. He says the
gene chip can be used for finding the existence of genetic diseases
including coronary artery diseases or neuro defect in the baby during
a certain stage of pregnancy itself. The chip could also be modified
to adjust to the patient's system to develop those chemicals which in
turn will help the patient recover from the present situation. The
specialists assembled here must debate whether gene chip can be used
for identifying the susceptibility of the baby to the allergic diseases
in the advanced stage of pregnancy. Can medical bio-informatics help
in finding a treatment regime for the mother which may give immunity
to the child from the allergic disease? The new R&D Centre of Ranbaxy
should work with research centres for maximizing the application of
medical bio-informatics for diagnostics and determination of treatment
It is reported that gene differences between humans and most
animals are very nominal. More than 90% of our DNA is similar.
320 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
This property is a boon to researchers since animal models can be
subsequently used for curing human diseases based on trial data. I
would recommend to the medical researchers to progress further in
this area for finding the application of gene chip as a diagnostic tool
and as a treatment regime for allergic diseases and asthma.
Nanotechnology is knocking at our doors, which has wider
applications. With the emergence of nanotechnology, there is
convergence of nano bio-info technologies resulting in new devices
which have wider applications in structure, electronics, and health
care and space systems. It will be the central focus for many technologies
to converge and open a large number of applications. Further, this
technology will have a large domestic market potential leading to a
robust economy. Nano-bio medical sensors will play a major role in
glucose detection and endoscopic implants. Nanotechnological
application to drug delivery system will revolutionize the health-care
to a large extent.
The world market in 2005 for nano materials, nano tools, nano
devices and nano biotechnology put together is expected to be over
two hundred billion dollars. I have come across a number of patents
being filed by Dr. Maitra of Delhi University especially in the area of
drug delivery system. I would suggest, the members of this Research
Centre may like to explore this area for nano technology application
and if necessary create national and global partnership to get strategic
leadership in this emerging area.
In India many R&D organizations and pharma industries discover
the molecules, but most of these newly discovered pharmaceutical
molecules are sold to multinationals abroad for further development
into drugs. Naturally, the benefit of value addition goes to the companies
abroad. The research and drug design, development and acceptance
for introduction are a big mission. Molecule to drug is indeed the
business of strong minds with the capacity to take calculated risks.
In this connection, I recall the principle taught by my Guru Prof Satish
Dhawan, "'If one takes challenging tasks, problems will always occur.
But problems should not become masters of the doers. Instead the
problem has to be defeated and we should succeed." I am happy to
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 321
know that this Research Centre is going to work on discovering new
molecules and transform them into drugs with special focus on drug
development for respiratory disorders, urinary tract infection, metabolic
disorders and novel antibiotics for upper tract infection.
I would like to share my experiences while 1 was in Anna
University, Chennai. One of them resulted in getting a patent for a
new molecule discovered from a herb as an anti-cancer drug. This
came out of the fusion of two great minds, one was a biotechnologist
and the other was a traditional Siddha medical practitioner. The
traditional system of medicine like Ayurveda, Siddha etc. have
advocated and practised preventive and curative medicinal recipes
specific to individuals. The body, mind, food and environment were
looked at holistically to suggest a preventive or curative approach to
health. Medicinal plants offer enormous scope for development of
drugs. We need to create database of traditional medicinal plants for
specific bioactivity and for leading to development of new drugs.
India has got tremendous opportunities for herbal farming and research.
I understand that R&D Centre of Ranbaxy has got partnership with
Centre for Biotechnology of Anna University in realizing certain special
formulations. The R&D Centre is also collaborating with CIMAP
Lucknow, IIT Roorkee and CDRI, Lucknow. This partnership definitely
will lead to drug discovery.
The traditional medicines are generally used within the country.
International marketing will need the products to go through
standardization and series of tests prescribed by the relevant approving
authority. Ranbaxy can provide leadership in standardizing the
traditional medicine drugs towards achieving the international standards.
Your success will spread in the country for the development and
marketing of Indian traditional medicine.
I have given some possible new areas which can be launched by
Ranbaxy during the next decade:
I can trace back the movement of Ranbaxy from 1961 from where
you have progressed from a manufacturer of bulk drug to become
one of the leading global generic drug companies today. Now Ranbaxy
has also moved on to become a research-based drug development
322 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
and manufacturing organisation. Your entry into Novel Drug Delivery
System and New Chemical Entities will truly ensure your achieving
the vision of becoming a research-driven global pharma company. In
this process you have created a strong capability in Current Good
Manufacturing Practices (CGMP) and a capability to go through the
rigorous US-FDA approval. Let me share with you a few thoughts:
(a) Ranbaxy can aspire to become the first in global generic
Pharma market by 2010 through R&D.
(b) Second area is New Molecule Drug Development. I
understand you have acquired a malarial drug molecule and
you are progressing towards clinical trials. You are also
working on a few new molecules which may enter the market
by 2007. You must enlarge your vision to fix a higher target
of putting at least five new molecule drugs in the global
(c) Third area, you can pay attention to, is Orphan Drug Molecule
which is controlled by the low volume need, specific to the
particular country. Business volume may not be high initially
but once developed many applications can follow leading
to profitability. In addition to profitability, the drugs developed
will serve the purpose in the third world and also enhance
the R&D capability of Ranbaxy as a global player.
(d) Time has come for the Indian pharma industry to become
multinational as an individual company or consortium
competing in global market.
This will be a fitting tribute to Dr. Parvinder Singh and to our
country, which was a leader in medical sciences, during the early
centuries of the first millennium.
While inaugurating the Research & Development Centre of
Ranbaxy, I wish you all success in your mission of developing,
producing and marketing cost-effective quality drugs and delivery
systems in the global arena.
Providing Equitable Health Care to All
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of the Forum-
9 meeting of the Global Forum for Health Research. I am happy
to note that the Global Forum is working to change the priorities
governing how existing resources for health research are used. The
conduct of the 9th meeting of the Forum in India provides an
opportunity for a larger number of participants from India and adjoining
countries to benefit from the deliberations of the meeting. I greet the
members of Global Forum for Health Research and the co-hosts,
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and the Indian Council of Medical
Research. I would like to discuss the topic "The Research Challenges
Recently, I met Dr. Charles Cummings and his team of the Johns
Hopkins University Board. I asked what was in my mind, to Dr Charles,
"What made Johns Hopkins a world class medical research institution
in addition to its cherishing societal missions?" His answer was, "it
is due to a great tradition, and it started with a number of visionaries
with value system, focused missions and the nature of working together.
This tradition continues even now." Indeed it is a great message
from Dr. Charles. I am sure, every R&D centre in the country has its
unique culture that comes out of research tradition, leading to the
results of the research reaching the people in the form of medicines
or vaccines. I recall, in India our institution L. V. Prasad Eye Institute
at Hyderabad has set a tradition of providing quality eye care particularly
with social commitment of 1:1. 1:1 implies one free eye care service
for every paid eye care service provided by the Institute. Also, they
have a tradition of excellent research in ophthalmology and spreading
the mission to various parts of the country.
Address at the 9th Annual Meeting (Forum-9) of Global Forum for Health Research,
Mumbai, 12 September 2005
324 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
I realize the research to realization of approved medical products
takes nearly 7 to 10 years. That means: when India in a year invents
say thousands of molecules, at least 10 to 20 should graduate into an
approved medical product. But if it is realized within the country it
will be very cost-effective and also internal wealth generator. Recently,
I have visited a number of public and private sector medical and
pharmaceutical R&D centres. In every laboratory I was very happy
to see a large number of scientists working in the frontier areas of
pharma sector, particularly in the private sector which provides them
strengths to become globally competitive. During the visit, I was
reminded of 10/90 phenomena with certain exceptions. Based on
the recommendation of Global Forum for Health Research, our R&D
institutions should take up development of vaccines for malaria, anti
vaccine for HIV, a robust drug for TB and other water borne diseases
on highest priority. The great tradition India nurtured over many
centuries must emerge again and multiple health research centres must
When I read the 10/90 Report on Health Research 2003-04, certain
thoughts came to my mind which I would like to share with you.
Every country has a specific combination of sanitary conditions,
nutrition, lifestyle and disease pattern. Naturally, the research has to
be nation-specific and also in certain cases region-specific so that we
can provide an integrated solution to the prevention or cure of a particular
disease and correct the 10/90 gap. In this connection I would like to
talk to you about a strategy adopted in a beautiful hill region in India
which I am fully familiar with.
On 19th October 2002,1 participated in the launching of a Mobile
Clinic and Research Centre in Uttaranchal. This effort was piloted by
the Technology Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council
[TIFAC], the Government of Uttaranchal, Birla Institute of Scientific
Research and many other agencies. After thirty-two months of its
operation, I found this mobile clinic has been used in six districts of
Uttaranchal and treated nearly 43,000 patients during this period.
Among the patients treated, 48% belong to the below poverty line
category. They have taken 9,600 ultrasound, 5,500 X-rays, 1700 ECGs
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 325
and nearly 20,000 lab tests. The mobile clinic has documented the
disease profile of the patients in the region (six districts) which falls
into the following categories: acute peptic ulcer, anaemia, anti-natal,
chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases, hyper tension, pelvic
inflammation, renal calculi, upper respiratory tract infection and worm
infection. This type of analysis has been possible because of
computerized system of clinic management introduced right in the
beginning. Also, the mobile clinic has been used in regions which
are normally inaccessible and where organized medical facility is not
available. This, I consider as the best form of reaching the health
care to the neediest people in the country. This is a low-cost solution
with committed health care personnel and institutions. The clinical
data provided by this model will be applicable for many hill zones.
This can be one method of correcting the 10/90 gap. I am sure there
may be many mobile clinic ventures in different parts of the country
run both by Government and non-governmental organizations. What
is needed is the networking of these facilities and integrating the data
for providing a definite direction to our health care research. Mobile
clinic will also provide research input for certain diseases prevalent
in the hill area and tribal region such as pulmonary edema and sickle
cell. The mobile clinic model can be followed by many states in India
and other countries to enable medical facilities reach the common
Now I would like to discuss about health status of our country
(India) and the specific measures needed for bridging the 10/90 gap
in health care research.
India has made considerable progress in its health status since
its Independence and particularly during the last fifteen years. At
the time of Independence, the life expectancy of an Indian was less
than thirty years. Between 1991-2005, the life expectancy of Indians
has gone up from 58 to 64.35 years, infant mortality has come down
from 87 to 60 deaths per 1000 live births and population growth rate
has decreased from 1.9% to 1.4%. Still infant mortality is very high.
We have to bring it to the level which has been achieved by Kerala.
326 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Let us look at some of the statistics. This data pertains to 1998
Disease status in India : 1998 and 2003
S.No. Diseases 1998 2003
1. Tuberculosis 12,300 (550) 3.5 lakh (16,000)
2. Malaria 22 lakh (644) 18 lakh (943)
3. HIV / AIDS 3.4 million 5.1 million
4. Cancer 6.3 lakh 7 lakh
5. Sickle Cell 10 lakh 25 lakh
6. Polio 1934 per year 225 per year (It has
Disorders 96 lakh (7100) 96 lakh (2800)
encephalitis 3,400 (680) 1,500 (344)
Note: Figures within brackets indicate the fatal cases.
* Recently the Japanese encephalitis has considerably increased
I would like to briefly talk to you on some of the diseases and
the actions proposed. Our experiences will definitely be shared with
the third world developing nations in order to provide health care for
There is an effort to bring the entire country under the Revised
National Tuberculosis Control Programme (RNTCP). So far, 93% of
our country has been brought under this programme and by October
2005 the entire country will become part of this programme. This
will ensure that at least 75% of the total tuberculosis cases are detected
every year and brought under direct surveillance. The treating agency
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 327
must ensure that at least 80% success in fully curing the disease is
achieved within the year. If this regime is followed continuously for
over ten years our tuberculosis load will come down to less than ten
per one lakh of population. For achieving this it is also essential to
work faster on the development and clearance of new drugs which
are in the pipeline.
Modem medicine has always relied on newer scientific inventions.
Many of the world inventions have been used by Indian health care
systems, effectively. India has also made significant contributions
in developing drugs that are critically required for India. One of the
achievements comes from a laboratory of the Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research (CSIR). CSIR lab has developed a new
therapeutic molecule for tuberculosis. This molecule has shown the
potential to cure TR in around 2 months, as against the standard treatment
of 6 to 8 months. This breakthrough is very important. After completing
the pre-clinical studies, the molecule transformed into a drug called
Sudo-terb is scheduled to undergo clinical trials in humans. This
development has been done as a public-private partnership involving
the Lupin, the three CSIR Laboratories, namely, Central Dmg Research
Institute, Indian institute of Chemical Technology and National
Chemical Laboratory, and the University of Hyderabad. It is hoped
that the drug will be in the market soon after the clinical trials. In
addition to the above, there is also a need to develop a more effective
vaccine against tuberculosis. The combined action of surveillance,
detection and disciplined treatment have to work together to ensure
faster cure of existing cases. Prevention of future cases has to be
achieved through R & D efforts of developing new breed of vaccine
and medicines. The collaborative action is needed between health
care personnel, doctors, researchers and the pharmaceutical companies
both in the private and public sectors to accomplish this mission.
Incidence of malaria has reduced from 22 lakh to 18 lakh in the
period 1998-2003. However, the death cases have increased from
644 to 943. I understand that the conventional medicine used for
treatment of malaria namely Chloroquin has become resistant to
Falciparum which causes cerebral malaria. Our scientific community
has developed and produced a drug named Arteether from Artemisinin
328 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
which has been found to be an effective cure for cerebral malaria. I
understand that this drug is being exported to over forty countries.
Also, Ranbaxy has acquired a malarial drug molecule and they are
progressing towards clinical trials. The fully developed drug will be
available in the market soon. This will be another important milestone
in the treatment of malaria.
Over the years I find that in spite of our efforts there is no rapid
reduction in the occurrence of malaria cases in the country. While
taking up new projects it is essential to have multi-faceted inter-sectoral
collaboration between various partners so that the impact assessment
of the project on new type of diseases can be foreseen and suitable
preventive action taken to contain the disease. In addition to this we
have to improve the surveillance, develop rapid diagnostic kit and
use the conventional prevention methods of spraying to control the
vector. International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Bio-technology
in collaboration with Bharat Bio-tech has developed a vaccine for
malaria which will go for toxicity trials on animals. There is a need
to speed up such projects so that they will benefit the entire community
who are affected by malaria in different parts of the world.
It is reported that in India the number of HIV infected people is
on the increase. It is critical that the transmission of HIV infection is
prevented. An effective vaccine that can prevent this disease will be
a cost-effective tool for control of infectious diseases. There are three
sub-types of viruses classified as A, B and C. I understand that Indian
population is largely affected by sub-type C virus.
There are two candidate vaccines presently considered for use
against sub-type C virus in our country. In view of the urgency of
finding a cost-effective vaccine the expert group reviewed the vaccine
candidate for HIV sub type C in the pipeline. Adeno-Associated Virus
(AAV) based vaccine with HIV-1 sub type C (African strain) developed
by Targetted Genetics Corp., USA was found to be in advanced stage
of test in different parts of the world. This HIV vaccine (tgAAC09) is
now undergoing Phase-I trial for safety and immunogenicity assessment
in healthy HIV uninfected volunteers at National AIDS Research
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 329
The Indian vaccine has been developed by scientists from National
Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases in collaboration with National
Aids Research Institute, Pune and Therion Biologies, USA. This is a
recombinant vaccine containing six genes from HIV 1-C strain. This
vaccine was developed from the virus isolated from National Aids
Research Institute, Pune. This will go into Phase-I trial in healthy
uninfected adults at Tuberculosis Research Centre, Chennai during
this year. Both these programmes are being progressed as a joint venture
between ICMR, National Aids Control Organisation (NACO) and
International Aids Vaccine Initiative. In addition to these two vaccines
a DNA based vaccine and SFV vaccine are also under development.
Time has now arrived to take up this development in a mission
mode so that an effective vaccine will be available for our country
within the next two years. Simultaneously, I would suggest that the
medical community must start working on the development of anti
vaccines for sub-type A and B also. This will go a long way in correcting
The treatment for cancer is prolonged and expensive. A common
man in the rural area may not be able to sustain the financial burden.
In that respect I am very happy to find that certain institutions like
Karunya Nilayam in Kerala is providing free medicines, free noon
meals and free accommodation to a large number of patients. This is
a very important societal mission.
Karunya Nilayam has initiated a programme of screening of
children in the rural areas and providing total treatment for over hundred
cancer affected children. Such societal missions must be carried out
by a large number of charitable and philanthropic organisations to
remove the suffering of the people from this dreaded disease. As a
first step we can contain the spread of the disease through education,
to know some of the causes needing lifestyle change and removal of
environment hazards. As a second step citizens can be advised to
report immediately to the doctor if they find anything disturbing in
their routine or anatomy. This is where the periodic screening of all
women between the age 35 and 60 through mammogram and papsmear
330 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
will help against breast and pelvic cancer. Advancement in cancer
treatment has resulted in the development of precision radiation and
tumour-targeted therapies. Latest technique uses nano-technology-
When I visited Chattisgarh, I was informed by various authorities
that sickle cell anaemia disease is prevalent in certain tribal areas
and even in the adjoining States. I understand over 25 lakh population
suffers from this disease. Life expectancy of this population is low
and it is reported that this disease is a silent killer.
Sickle cell disease is an inherited condition. Two genes for the
sickle haemoglobin must be inherited from one's parents in order to
have the disease. A person who receives a gene for sickle cell disease
from one parent and a normal gene from the other has a condition
called sickle cell trait. Sickle cell trait produces no symptoms or problems
for most people. The severity of sickle cell disease varies tremendously.
Some people with sickle cell disease lead lives that are nearly normal.
Others are less fortunate, and can suffer from a variety of complications.
Some of the common symptoms seen in the patients suffering from
sickle cell anaemia include (i) anaemia, (ii) intermittent jaundice, (iii)
severe joint pains, and (iv) recurrent infections. These symptoms
appear between the age of four and five, and severity increases with
advancement of age. The available treatment strategies can be divided
into anti-sickling agents, vasoactive drugs, bone marrow transplantation
and gene therapy. Dr. Km ice had shown that the new gene repair
technology may hold promise as a treatment for sickle cell anaemia
and other diseases by correcting the DNA mutation from which they
arise. The medical researchers have to take up this task in all earnestness
and find a comprehensive treatment for this disease.
Through the persistent efforts of the Government and non
governmental organisations the occurrence of polio cases has come
down from 1934 in 1998 to 225 in 2003. And it has further come
down to 27 in this year. There are certain districts in UP where the
occurrence is still prevalent. We need to establish the causes of such
occurrence and find remedial measures so that we can eradicate the
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 331
occurrence of Polio from these districts. We can adopt a special strategy
for motivating the families to bring the children for vaccination. There
must be a system to watch the health care requirement of every new
born child in the families in the villages and towns of these districts.
Once the record of the children is available the health authorities must
persistently go to the parents and educate them on the necessity for
immunizing the child against polio. They must also be told that there
is no side effect for the child due to polio vaccination. Also, it may
be advisable to have polio camps in these villages on a monthly basis
using a mobile clinic so that all the children in the age group of new
born to five years are immunized during these camps. The children
who are not brought for immunization should also be tracked and it
may be necessary to send the doctor or nursing assistants to their
homes for providing the immunization. Presently, among the four
polio strains P-2 has been eliminated. P-3 is virtually on the way out.
We need to eliminate P-4 and P-1. Once we know the exact strain it
will be ideal to use the monovalent vaccine instead of the regular
trivalent vaccine. This will ensure faster containment of the strains.
I understand that pharmaceutical companies are in the process
of developing appropriate vaccines for cholera, diarrhoeal diseases,
dengue and Japanese encephalitis. These programmes have to be
done in a mission mode to ensure availability of these vaccines in the
market in a time-bound manner. Also, there is a need to mount a
programme for development of vaccines for Kala-Azar.
The new theme of vaccine inventions in the future will be
combination vaccines. These vaccines will be helpful in providing
immunity against many diseases with just one injection leading to
lower investment, less number of doctor visits and above all lesser
patient complaints. Since India has already mastered the recombinant
DNA technology like Hepatitis-B, human insulin etc. collaborative
research work must commence to produce combination vaccine covering
Human disorders can be classified into three broad categories.
They are genetic disorders, disorders due to cellular function deficiency,
332 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
and disorders arising out of certain pathogens. Global Forum for Health
Research can recommend intensive research for developing and
producing cost-effective treatment regime for the above categories
of disorder through -
(a) Gene therapy and gene chip research,
(b) Stem cell research, and
(c) Combination vaccine and pathogen-specific antibiotics.
This could lead to cost-effective and safe treatment for the
needy and improve the quality of life of mankind on this planet.
I had a discussion with Dr. Gullapalli N. Rao, Chairman and
President of International Agency for Prevention of Blindness (IAPB)
- Vision 2020. He has quantified that 50 million people are blind in
the world today. 150 million are with low vision. He estimates, for
providing complete eye care the investment needed is one dollar per
person. That means, it is $ 6 billion for the whole world. Out of
which, $ 3 billion has already been invested. The net requirement is
$ 3 billion. This $ 3 billion can be mobilized through a group insurance
scheme, with a nominal contributi on of just 25 cents per person per
annum. Similar Health-care Insurance Scheme can be replicated for
providing total health care to all the citizens of the world. The Global
Forum for Health Research (Forum-9), may like to consider adapting
such a scheme for this global village.
I suggest that Forum-9 which is focusing on poverty, equity and
health research can make the following recommendations to all its
partner countries and assist in their implementation :
(a) treatment of HIV AIDS as the highest priority area and
networking of all institutions in the world working in this
research so that an effective anti-vaccine for all types of
HIV is developed and made available to the people by 2007;
(b) integration of research efforts of malaria, typhoid, diarrhoeal
disorder for facilitating development of combination vaccine
by 2007 so that we can aspire a world free from all the
three diseases within the next decade;
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 333
(c) the commissioning of networked mobile clinic research
centres in different parts of the world for providing first
line medical cover and creation of data base on the disease
profile of the rural sectors for enabling research towards
prevention and cure of such diseases through medical and
(d) conduct of impact assessment of environmental nutritional
and lifestyle factors on the health status of individuals and
disease burden so that pragmatic lifestyle practices can be
generated for leading a healthy productive life and propagating
the same amongst all the citizens; and
(e) integration of actions of health care personnel, doctors,
psychologists, researchers, pharmacologists, economists,
social scientists and environmentalists for working towards
the mission of providing disease-free health to all.
My best wishes to all the participants of the Global Forum for
Health Research (Forum-9) in their mission of providing equitable
health care to all the citizens of the world.
T AM DELIGHTED to participate in the World Sight Day organized
by the "Vision 2020: The Right to Sight" and "Lions International"
at Hyderabad. My greetings to the organizers, ophthalmologists,
optometrists, medical social workers, medical technologists and
distinguished guests. I am happy that four programmes, on "Andhra
Pradesh Child Eye Health Initiative", "Sight for Kids", "Lions Diabetic
Retinopathy" and "Sight First - II" are being launched by "Vision
2020:Right to Sight" in collaboration with Lions International. I would
like to talk to you on the topic, "Our Mission: Vision for all."
There is a continuous increase in the diabetes especially in the
developing countries. An estimated 35 million people have diabetes
in India. Urban India has almost four times the rates of diabetes in
comparison with the rural India. Diabetic retinopathy is the most
common ophthalmic complication of diabetics. The reported prevalence
of diabetic retinopathy in India varies from 20 to 30%. By these
estimates, we may have around 5 to 6 million persons with diabetic
retinopathy. Blindness from diabetic retinopathy is fast acquiring
the proportion of a public health problem. This is the right time to
launch the diabetic retinopathy programme to build capacity among
our medical professionals to handle this disease with adequate
professionalism. It is important that the LV Prasad Eye Institute, in
partnership with 14 primary and secondary eye hospitals, is organizing
training programmes for ophthalmologists, optometrists and medical
social workers on different aspects of diabetic retinopathy, particularly
screening of target patients at peripheral eye hospitals and diagnostic
and treatment through tele-medicine system.
A national mission for protocol-driven treatment has to be evolved
involving mission-oriented doctors throughout the country. This team
Address at the Celebration of the World Sight Day, Hyderabad, 15 October 2005
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 335
should organize series of eye camps, reinforcing many eye hospitals
with technology to cover larger population for the treatment. In doing
so, integration of minds is possible and governmental support can be
made easier. India already has a national programme for control of
blindness and also "Vision 2020: The Right to Sight Initiative". There
is a universal sympathy to the visually impaired. This service-oriented
attitude drawing on the sympathy can bring together a number of
partners in the national mission.
The International Association for Prevention of Blindness can
create a tele-Ophthalmology network using tele-medicine network
of ISRO. Once we have the connectivity, then there should be a universal
tele-ophthalmology system in place, and ophthalmologic specialists
can come together in virtual clinics. A multi eye clinic environment
with seamless two-way interaction between the doctors and patients
will enable the eye specialist to diagnose the particular patient and
also seek expert opinion from distance doctors located in remote areas.
Such sharing of knowledge will provide cost-effective integrated
treatment for the patients in the specialized areas like corneal blindness,
surgical complications, posterior segment disorder and retinitis, etc.
The same system can be transformed into a virtual ophthalmic institute
from where a specialist lecture can not only reach any remote corner
but also enable a good eye specialist in the remote area to share multicast
information with others in the network. The same system can also be
used to offer practical training to eye doctors on the intricacies of eye
operation through a "Virtual Operation Theatre". Such is the power
of tele-ophthalmology. We have implemented a tele-medicine system
in Rashtrapati Bhavan with CARE Hospital.
You are aware that approximately twenty-six percent of our
population is still below the poverty line and medical care has to be
provided to a large population. I was discussing this problem with
some of my doctor friends and those connected with health care. I
realized that the major problem in Indian health care delivery system
including the area of ophthalmology is the near total dependency on
medical imports of diagnostic and therapeutic equipment and devices
including consumables. While the common man seldom buys anything
imported, he is made to purchase or pay partly for the cost of the imported
336 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
gadgets for health care. This clearly brings out the fact that we need to
create an infrastructure capable to produce our own medical devices,
consumables and equipment, based on the technology available and to
be developed within the country, at affordable cost. Certain initiatives
were taken in this direction but a commercially competitive effort leading
to production and service network is yet to emerge.
A consortium of ophthalmology institutions has to promote
research and development of state-of-the-art ophthalmology equipment
in collaboration with medical institutions and medical universities
The recent identification and characterization of progenitors with
stem cell properties has opened new avenues that may be useful for
treating functional impairments caused by the death of specific cell
population. Stromal and neuronal degeneration are the causes of
debilitating visual impairment associated with many ocular diseases,
such as degenerative diseases of cornea, retinitis pigmentosa (RP),
age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and glaucoma. The stem
cells may help restore vision in the patient who has these diseases, by
re-populating or rescuing the damaged ocular surface cells or retinal
cells from further degeneration. The work done in the area by LV
Prasad Eye Institute is pioneering, and other eye institutes in the country
can follow this model.
The stem cell research has tremendous potential for ophthalmology.
I suggest the International Association of Prevention of Blindness
along with Lions Club International can join together with other partners
and promote a research programme in stem cell based on the experience
of LV Prasad Eye Institute.
The major eye care hospitals in the country namely, Arvind Eye
Hospital, Madurai; Sankara Nethralaya, Chennai; LV Prasad Eye
Institute, Hyderabad, JPM Rotary Eye Hospital, Cuttack; Sri Satguru
Seva Trust, Chitrakoot; and Rajendra Prasad Eye Institute, New Delhi
are rendering excellent eye care service in different regions. It will
be useful to network all these hospitals through a tele-education network
and share the experience of specialists in various fields of
ophthalmology. They can have periodic tele-meetings in which the
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 337
special and unique experiences and the special strategies adopted by
the doctors can be discussed. This will enable knowledge sharing
and feasible solutions to certain special classes of diseases, which
are being seen for the first time in a particular region. Also, the network
can be used to conduct research on special areas including stem cell
research. There is a need for multiple institutions sharing high cost
research facilities. Above all, ego barriers are toughest to overcome.
Nano-technology is finding large-scale application in drug delivery
system and biomedical application. The low dimensionality of many
nano-structures, in which electrons are free to move in only two, one
or near zero dimensions, has a profound effect on their chemical,
electronic and optical properties.
Focal stimulation requires electrodes or groups of electrodes in
the order of 100 nano metres or less with spacing of no more than 5
micron. Localized structures of this sort would stimulate the actions
of rods and cones in the retina of the eye. This type of structure is
fundamental to the possibility of developing an effective prosthesis
device to restore vision in certain eye diseases.
All the major eye care centres in different parts of the country
can jointly establish a Nano Technology Research Foundation in
collaboration with international institutions for eye care and biomedical
The pyramid model of eye-care delivery as focused by Dr. G.N.
Rao is an excellent roadmap. It involves creation of a four tier system
of treatment namely primary, secondary, tertiary and advanced tertiary
care. In India, we have 20% vision centres for primary care, 70%
service centres for secondary care, 50% training centres for tertiary
care and 25% centres of excellence. We need to double the investment
to provide full complement of eye care facility for all the four sectors
with participating eye centres, government agencies and international
partners. An integrated proposal based on the eye pyramid model can
be prepared by the International Association for Prevention of Blindness
India Chapter, Lions International and LV Prasad Eye Institute for
submission to Ministry of Health, private sector industries, Lions Club
organisations and philanthropists for necessary funding.
338 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Recently, there was a meeting of cured patients, their doctors
and a few social workers. One important point which emerged during
the interaction was that the relationship between the patient and doctor
extends to patient's family. This in turn, transmits effective messages
from one family to another family on advice to prevent the eye diseases,
necessity of periodic checks, the dietary habits and the need for life
style changes including eye exercise for good eye health. Actually, I
believe this good contact between the doctor and patients is comparable
to that of a teacher and student. I request every doctor to play the
role of a teacher in advising every family on eye disease prevention
and methods to lead a healthy life. I hope you will find time for this
'Defect-free vision for all' should be our national mission. The
eye problems of the children can be corrected, if diagnosed early.
Such programmes should aim at screening all the children. I am glad
that today we are launching 'Sight for Kids' as part of the "Vision
2020:Right to Sight programme". Teams of paramedical personnel
can visit nearby schools and villages and examine children for possible
vision defects. Any one having defective vision or any obvious
complaints should be sent to the nearest centre for further investigation
and treatment. I have been asking the students to be helpful to their
colleagues by bringing out special eye problem of the child to the
notice of the parents or the teachers.
We need a very good ophthalmologic centre in the north-eastern
states. The International Agency for Prevention of Blindess in
association with Lions Club International can evolve a proposal for
creation of a state-of-the-art Ophthalmologic Institute for submission
to the North Eastern Council for consideration.
We have the best of doctors and technologists in India. We have
core competence in design and software engineering. Emerging
technologies in virtual reality and micro machines will transform the
health care scenario. This transformation should lead to helping the
people who cannot afford the modern medical care. To improve the
availability of eye care facility to the rural masses, I recommend
deployment of mobile eye clinics by all the eye care centres. I am
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 339
happy to note that the estimated number of blind people in India during
the last decade has come down from nine million in 1990 to 6.7 million
in 2002. We have to aim that in the coming decade it should come
down to less than 4 million. One of the great qualities of human
being as envisioned by Almighty is to give and give. What any one
of us can give who is blessed with eye vision? When I see you all,
members of International Association of Prevention of Blindness,
members of Lions Club International and other agencies, professionals
of LV Prasad Eye Institute, ophthalmologists and medical technologists,
I find God has blessed you all to give the vision for thousands and
thousands of our fellow citizens. In this direction if anything is needed
I can certainly assist.
I am sure that the partnership of ophthalmologists, vision scientists
and medical social workers will lead to high quality eye care which
will enable India to succeed in the mission of "Vision for AIL.
Hearing and Speech for All
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of 3rd Cochlear
Implant Group of India Conference. I greet the organizers, ENT
specialists, neurologists, audiologists, paediatricians, medical social
scientists, medical technologists, device manufacturers and other
distinguished guests. I am happy to note that the Cochlear Implant
Group of India during the last three years has created a special awakening
for the treatment of people with profound hearing impairment. Hearing
and speech are the two important faculties given by the Almighty to
the mankind among many others. The restoration of these faculties
to the people, who do not possess them, is indeed a great service to
God. I was wondering what thoughts I can share with this audience.
I would like to discuss the topic "The Mission: Hearing and Speech
When I visited Vikram hospital in Coimbatore a few years back,
I real ized technological intervention is possible for bringing back hearing
to the deaf and dumb children by implanting a device called Cochlear
Implant. Dr. Aruna Viswanathan and her team demonstrated to me
about the whole process of implanting the device and the subsequent
training procedure to the children. I saw 4 year old deaf and dumb
children. After one month of implanting and training they spoke out
a few words legibly. After 6 months of computer-aided training, I
have seen the children speaking normally. This touching scene moved
me. I felt that I have to work to bring the cost of cochlear implant
down, so that thousands and thousands of children in India and abroad
can afford to have this device and lead a normal life. That is why I am
Address at the inauguration of the 3rd Cochlear Implant Group of India Conference,
New Delhi, 5 November 2005
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 341
As per recent statistics, the number of people with profound hearing
disability in India is about one million. In addition, there are over
1.2 million people with severe hearing disability, 0.9 million people
with moderate hearing disability and 7.1 million people with very
mild hearing disability. The medical community, social institutions
and corporate houses have the task of removing the disability of nearly
10 million people with the support of the Government. The severe,
moderate and mild category disability can be treated using conventional
and digital hearing aids. Many ENT specialists spread across the
country are doing this to a certain extent. But this has got to be intensified
in the remote rural areas where people with disability suffer silently.
Can we remove this pain?
Regarding the profound hearing disability, treatment is undertaken
only in very few medical institutions since it needs a special device
called cochlear implant, which I described to you earlier. When the
child doesn't have the hearing capacity it leads to dumbness. Cochlear
implant coupled with computer aided training helps the deaf and dumb
individuals to regain near-normal hearing/speaking capabilities.
Basically it is bypassing the damaged inner ear portion by replacing
its functions with an electronic system having external mike, speech
processing circuit, transmitter and a receiver. The receiver is implanted
below the ear. The receiver has an electrode, which will be inserted
into the cochlear portion of the ear. Speech processor processes the
input audio signals and converts them into electrical signals in various
channels. The transmitter transmits these signals to the implant's multi-
channd electrode, which terminates in various points of the cochlear.
The latest cochlear implant technology, contour advance, recently
introduced in India, is specifically designed to protect the small and
delicate cochlea structures during surgery. This helps to preserve any
residual hearing. Its curved shape also provides more focused stimulation
of the hearing nerve for better quality outcomes. The further research
in cochlear implant must lead to design and production of cochlear
implants which will need minimum invasive procedures for fitment.
The fitment of cochlear implants for treating the profound hearing
impaired cases started in India in the year 1995. In the beginning,
342 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
there used to be five or ten cases treated each year. Today, due to
the awareness created by various institutions we are able to fit 150
implants a year. I am happy to know that among the hundred and
fifty fitted, Army hospitals account for nearly seventy. In the last one
decade we have treated nearly 750 cases in all. That means we are
able to reach only 0.075% of the affected population in the country.
There has been continuous improvement in the cochlear implants
produced by international manufacturers and the cost of implant has
also been going up. How do we reach all the people affected by profound
hearing disability? This is what this conference must address. Then
only we will be able to achieve the goal of providing hearing and
There are three challenges in removing the profound hearing
disability. One is a production of a cost-effective cochlear implant,
second is less invasiveness of the surgical procedure and the third is
kindhearted doctors who implant and train the patients further. Presently,
the cost of implant works out to nearly Rs. 6 to 8 lakhs per piece and
the total cost of the operation including rehabilitation will work out
to Rs.10 lakh per patient. This cost is unaffordable for many people
in our country. In many countries the cost of cochlear implant including
the operation is borne by the insurance companies or the social welfare
schemes. In the absence of such a scheme in the country there is a
need to have a three-pronged approach to solve the problem. The
corporate world can bear the cost of cochlear implant for fitment to
certain number of patients as a societal mission. Secondly, there must
be a concerted effort by Indian scientists and engineers in collaboration
with ENT specialists, neurologists, audiologists and paediatricians
to develop a cost-effective cochlear implant through a mission mode
programme. Development tasks have to be undertaken in parallel by
two or three groups. Thirdly, the Government can consider waiving
certain levies presently charged on import of cochlear implants.
The people who are otherwise healthy in body and mind get isolated
because of deafness. Helen Keller says if "I were to be born again
with physical impairment, I would prefer to be blind rather than deaf,
as deafness isolates more". Hence it is essential to empower each
child or adult with profound hearing impairment with cochlear implant
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 343
as the child will be able to hear its father and mother apart from music.
I would like to narrate one experience, which took place on 2nd October
2005 at Rashtrapati Bhavan. To mark the 60th Anniversary of Mahindra
& Mahindra, the management decided to donate 60 cochlear implants
to hearing impaired. I inaugurated this programme. The other corporate
groups and social institutions spread in different parts of the country
can also participate in this noble societal mission and donate a certain
number of cochlear implants to the needy patients. The Government
on its part can provide 150% weighted deduction of such contribution
for purposes of computing income tax.
Some development activity has been initiated to design, develop
and manufacture low-cost cochlear implants in the country. This should
be taken up in a mission mode by at least two groups and we should
aim at bringing out the basic cochlear implant without frills. For
example, I understand that the number of electrodes needed for realizing
reasonable audibility is just seven whereas manufacturers use ten,
sixteen and twenty two. Electro-physiologists for ears confirm that
the audibility improvement beyond seven electrodes is very marginal
and the designers should keep this in mind. I am sure the scientists,
engineers, and the medical community assembled here will be able
to take this challenge and bring out a cochlear implant within the
next two years costing less than Rs. 1 lakh. In this direction, I appreciate
the initiative taken by DRDO. We must succeed in this development,
so that we can offer this product to many needy patients, spread in
different parts of the world.
Apart from the above two interventions, the government can
consider waiving the custom duty and sales tax levied on the import
of cochlear implant in the country. This will substantially reduce the
cost of cochlear implant and the operation and make it affordable to
certain class of people in the interim period while the indigenous
development is in progress.
Recently, I studied the pyramid model of eye-care delivery as
focused by Dr. G.N.Rao. It involves creation of a four-tier system of
treatment namely primary, secondary, tertiary and advanced tertiary
care. In India, we have 20% vision centres for primary care, 70%
344 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
service centres for secondary care, 50% training centres for tertiary
care and 25% centres of excellence. We need to double the investment
to provide full complement of eye care facility for all the four sectors
with participating eye centres, government agencies and international
partners. Cochlear Implant Group of India can study this pyramid
model and prepare an ear-care pyramid model. An integrated proposal
based on the ear-care pyramid model can be prepared by the Cochlear
Implant Group of India for preventing deafness, for submission to
the Ministry of Health, private sector industries and societal
organizations for necessary funding.
'Defect-free hearing and speech for all' should be our national
mission. The ear problem of the children can be corrected, if diagnosed
early. Such programmes should aim at screening all the children. I
would suggest that societal organizations could launch a "hearing
and speech for kids" programme on the lines of 'sight for kids'
programme launched by the Government of Andhra Pradesh. Teams
of paramedical personnel can visit nearby schools and villages and
examine children for possible hearing and speech defects. Anyone
having defective hearing or any obvious complaints should be sent to
the nearest centre for further investigation and treatment. I have been
asking the students to be helpful to their colleagues by bringing out
special hearing problem of the child to the notice of the parents or the
We have the best of doctors and technologists in India. We have
core competence in design and software engineering. Emerging
technologies in virtual reality and micro machines will transform the
health care scenario. This transformation should lead to helping the
people who cannot afford the modern medical care. To improve the
availability of hearing and speech care facility to the rural masses, I
recommend deployment of mobile hearing and speech clinics by all
the ENT centres. One of the great qualities of human being as envisioned
by Almighty is to give and give. What any one of us can give who is
blessed with hearing and speech? When I see you all, eminent ENT
specialists, neurologists, audiologists, paediatricians and medical
technologists, I find God has blessed you all to give the hearing and
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 345
speech for thousands and thousands of our fellow citizens. In this
direction if anything is needed, 1 can certainly assist.
Disability in general reduces the self-esteem of the individual
and increases the dependence on others. Especially in rural setting,
the disabled person is dependent on parents, relatives or friends. Our
efforts must be to bring about a sense of equality and liberty among
the disabled persons, either men or women. Equality can be generated
by first liberating them from the causes of disability like hearing
impairment. This can be achieved by providing assistive devices and
systems, which will enable them to carry out their tasks without
dependence on others. Also the disabled can be facilitated to achieve
economic independence by providing them vocational skills consistent
with their individual strengths. The committee of experts including
representatives from corporate and voluntary sectors has identified
around 120 occupations at executive / management / supervisory levels
and around 946 occupations at skilled / semi-skilled / unskilled levels
for employing disabled persons without compromising the quality of
work. Organizations and industry should voluntarily come forward
to offer these occupations to the disabled so that they can realize
their economic independence and also have the satisfaction of
contributing to the cause of nation building. This is the only way we
can provide equality and liberty to the disabled brothers and sisters
My best wishes to Cochlear Implant Group of India and the cochlear
implant development groups for success in their mission of providing
hearing and speech for ail.
J AM HAPPY to participate in the 10th Convocation of National
Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences. I congratulate
the successful and meritorious students of the institute who are being
conferred degrees and diplomas in various disciplines. I compliment
the Faculty members for shaping the young minds and transforming
them into valuable professionals. I would like to discuss with you
the topic "New Challenges in Brain Research".
NIMHANS is a place of sustained excellence in neurosciences
for more than 50 years now. What started as a mental asylum, grew
into a mental hospital to a very fine health care centre and research
institution rolled into one. NIMHANS had continuously kept pace
with the advances in neurosciences and brain research. It has cured
several hundreds of thousands of patients every year. Such a continuous
stream of patients would generate clinical data base. Since inception,
this would have grown to be very high in volume and I am sure would
be continuously used for your advanced research. NIMHANS should
be a place for removing the pain of the people. But the research
results have to address finding solutions to diseases like Parkinson's
disease, for which the cure had been eluding the researchers.
NIMHANS has to have a vision to enter into the most difficult
area such as "is there any solution for mentally challenged children"?
Neurons in the brain can be modelled in the supercomputers available
today; they can be mapped and imaged by some of the high resolution
imageries, they can be replaced by computer memories. Such capabilities
which are arising out of advances in other areas such as information
technology, biotechnology and nanotechnology, converge and combine
Address at the 10th Convocation of National Institute of Mental Health and
Neurosciences, Bangaluru, 21 November 2005
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 347
together to provide a technique of awesome power that only rivals
the power of the Creator.
The convergence of advances in multiple disciplines of science
and engineering will ultimately help the brain researchers to understand
the genetic disorders. These disorders can manifest as mental disorders
and create mentally challenged children. Stem cell research and
gene chip application are going to play a very vital role in reversing
many of the brain disorders. Can the brain researchers from NIMHANS
and the young who are graduating today take it as a mission of their
profession to find a long-lasting solution to the problem of mentally
challenged children and bring them to the mainstream? This will be
a God's Mission for you.
Since the graduates and teachers are mostly in brain research it
is essential to understand the relationship between the human brain
power and the incoming revolution taking place in the computer
technology. For example, computer works through precise calculations
and is extremely fast when it comes to quantitative numbers. The
brain is extremely slow in this aspect. However, the brain can recognize
speech, and remember faces better than even the best supercomputer
in the world. This is because it works with more memory than
computing units. The impact of the working of the brain on the
computer architecture (bio-inspired computing) and the care of the
brain inspired by computing elements (computer-inspired biology)
would become the future in neurosciences.
When I was associated with Anna University in Chennai some
time back, apart from my teaching activities on various societal
transformation missions, I was guiding a doctoral research project.
The research was aimed to find integrated solution using a software,
hardware application to achieve a near normal functioning of the brain
of mentally challenged children. When I saw some of the mentally
challenged children performing certain activities like singing, painting
in Central Institute of Mental Retardation, Thiruvananthapuram, I
got convinced that one day convergence of information and
communication technology, medical electronics, biotechnology and
mathematical simulation can find a solution for their problem. We
348 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
have been studying the mentally challenged children in various research
institutions, homes for mentally retarded and hospitals. We are confident
that it will be possible to transform the functions of the damaged
portion of the bram, say left hemisphere, to the normal portion, right
hemisphere of the brain by some triggering mechanism, or by implanting
a biochip to carry out those functions. This is a complex problem
which needs an integrated approach involving medical scientists and
technologists for a targeted permanent solution which can help children
afflicted with this mental disability.
A neurological disorder that affects the functioning of the brain,
that is autism, impacts the normal development of the brain in the
areas of social interaction and communication skills. Children and
adults with autism typically have difficulties in verbal and non-verbal
communication, social interactions, and leisure or play activities. The
treatment is not amenable exclusively through a scientific diagnosis.
It has to be through physiological, psychological and neurological
integrated care. Now, I would like to discuss the multi-disciplinary
The confusion between mind and brain has always perplexed
the medical scientists. Answers to the questions like "What is the
mind?" and "Who am I?" don't lie in the domain of philosophers and
psychologists alone. Molecular biologists and neurologists are
formulating their own theories. This phenomenon leads to different
types of situations. First there is a presence of energy system in the
existence of a soul that enters and lives in a personality over a life
time. This eternal entity is capable of both withdrawing into a slumber
and tapping the universal energy of divinity and collective consciousness
for its empowerment. Second, there is heritable sensory and biological
component to the personality and behavioural traits. Third, as I
understand, no definitive psycho-pharmacology recommendations are
available for specific groups of patients with personality disorders.
However, schizophrenia needs to be prevented at primary, secondary
or at tertiary levels. Even if we are not in a position to prevent
schizophrenia at the primary level, we may hope to arrest the disease
at the secondary level. This may be facilitated if we have a supportive
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 349
socio-iegal-political system. I suggest that psychologists, molecular
biologists, neurologists and physiologists along with sociologists, law
makers and politicians should all work together and find appropriate
interventions for facilitating recovery and rehabilitation of such patients.
Personality and mental disorders start as nearly more than a
normally unbalanced state of the psyche brought about by a certain
chain of circumstances or happenings from birth which varies greatly
from person to person and usually commences with the phenomenon
known as psychological abandonment. The basics of this subject are
simple. Every human being learns its first lesson of love as a baby
and small child from its mother. If that did not occur, then that child
will be susceptible to behavioural problems in later years because he
or she has never learnt to love and cannot form a satisfactory relationship
of any reasonable integrity or duration. There may be other factors
but that is where it all starts. The medical technologists should mount
a programme in which they should propagate the importance of
preventing the feeling of abandonment among the children by their
families. This can be done through their counselling and assistance
programmes which they are carrying out among the patients and their
families. More than treating the patient, it is important to emphasize
the need for propagating love among the children, which could be
carried to the neighbourhood by the suffering family members.
The personality consists of the physical body, the emotional body
and the mental body. In a fully developed personality, the three vehicles
are synthesized into a harmoniously working unit. This means that
there is an alignment of the mind and feelings so that our outer actions
are expressed in a balanced manner. It is the goal of every spiritually
active person to create such an integration of lower self for, it is then
only with the correct alignment of forces that consistent soul contact
can occur. It is essential to make the actual link between the lower
and higher selves to form a rainbow bridge. This way the soul's
presence would become ever-increasing realities. Until a fairly advanced
state of personal evolution is reached in which there is a fusion between
the lower and higher selves, everything about the personality is either
inherited or created and assumed temporarily. When the soul's presence
enters and is experienced through the physical body, a very perceptible
350 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
change in our physical energy occurs. We appear to radiate. This
radiance is felt and experienced by those sensitive enough to perceive
it as warmth, a loving essence, quite different from the heat of natural
vitality and sensuality. Such an enlightened person emanates a distinct
physical energy which is not intrusive into the space of others, but
nevertheless, penetrates and most often uplifts them. I would suggest
the neuroscientists graduate themselves to this state of consciousness
which will enable them to transmit their love and compassion to the
community which will light the lamp of happiness amongst many
I understand that by proper stimulation of brain, we should be
able to regenerate the lost neuron and thereby make the brain function
better. Dr. T.R. Raju of your institute has reported that by intra
cranial self stimulation in rats, more neurons get created and it improves
the learning ability and faster cure for injuries. Enriched environment
is also capable of generating neurons using natural stimulation.
Electrical stimulation needs insertion of electrodes in the brain and it
can be highly pinpointed. We have to resolve ethical issues for resorting
to this treatment among human beings. We may also try to explore
the application of electro-magnetic stimulation non-invasively to
stimulate the dormant neurons of the specific brain areas. Use of
stem cells, neuronal transplantation and nerve growth factors may
also be considered. I suggest intensive research should be carried
out in this area for finding early solutions to treat mentally challenged
patients through a multi-pronged approach. My research scholar is
exploring the above possibilities and we see light on the other side of
I am happy to know about the initiatives and research activities
of NIMHANS in molecular and cellular neuroscience, developmental
neuroscience, neurovirology, systems neuroscience, theoretical
neuroscience and computational neuroscience. One of the interesting
areas for Indian scientists would be researching the Body-Mind-Spirit
connection to understand a large dimension of consciousness. This
would involve researching the Pineal Gland or the Pineal System.
Philosophically viewed as a "sphincter to control the flow of thought"
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 351
or "seat of the soul" and scientifically recognized as an active endocrine
gland or neuro-endocrine transducer organ, the Pineal involvement
in cycles of growth and development during the lifespan has long
been recognized. Pineal holds the key to find out solutions for many
health problems. Pineal's influence on other endocrine glands as "a
regulator of regulators" and its role in immune response,
thermoregulation and mediation of various biological cycles such as
regulation of sleep and physiological adaptations to the environment,
are being studied. Research indicates that pineal involvement in mental
health may go beyond psychosis and that the Pineal plays a significant
role in the manifestation of several mental illnesses such as schizophrenia
and affective disorders. The link between Pineal dysfunction and
suppressed immune response, and its characteristics such as sensitivity
to variations in environmental light and electromagnetic influences,
are the few areas which need extensive research. I also believe that
there is a vast scope for Indian scientists to focus their research activities
on the most significant aspect of pineal functioning, that is its role
as the interface of mental and spiritual facets of the self with the
According to an estimate of World Health Organisation (WHO),
brain disorders would be the greatest public health threat in the next
few decades to come. A comprehensive human brain project is required
to be progressed for tackling different diseases such as depression,
sleep disorders, epilepsy, schizophrenia etc. with global participation
from many countries. The project should aim at preparing a
comprehensive structural and functional map of human brain and
facilitate convergence of all activities pertaining to brain research in
the Centre. This is indeed a challenging task which requires active
participation and effective contribution of research institutions like
NIMHANS, government agencies, academia and the entire medical
Incidence of epilepsy in the country is fairly high. Present treatment
for epilepsy using surgical or pharmacological control and management
of the episodes involves quietening the hyperactive parts of the brain
neurons. Is it possible to locate the specific focal point responsible
352 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
for the seizure through neural imaging by MR! or Positron Emission
Tomography (PET)? Scientists working in nanotechnology can work
with brain researchers to develop a small device which can be implanted
in the brain close to the focal point which can buffer spurious high
intensity spikes and can create a near normal brain function and thereby
improve the quality of life of these patients. Can we target specific
nano-tracers to the epileptic foci to carry out a similar function? It is
quite a challenge which the centre can consider.
HIV is emerging as a major health care concern. Scientific
evidence exists to indicate the relationship between HIV and cognitive
functions of the brain such as memory, learning etc. Neuroscientists
may need to address the pathophysiology of cerebral dysfunction in
HIV positive cases. It will be worthwhile to explore the therapeutic
potentials of indigenous systems of medicine including the herbal
approach to circumvent the adverse effects of HIV on neuronal functions.
This will be possible because of the multidisciplinary networking
systems created by NIMHANS through its worldwide connectivity.
The complex nature of brain functioning engulfs in itself answers
to many problems that need to be fully understood for human
development. The structural and functional mapping of human brain
would help in scientific analysis of human behaviour. During my
recent visit to Switzerland I saw the researchers in Brain and Mind
Lab (EPFL), Lusanne working on such a mapping. Through rigorous
and extensive research findings, if it becomes possible to analyze
behavioural tendencies and derive an inclination or aptitude pattern
of a person, especially at an early age, it will help the person to opt
for that field or area, for optimum utilization of the human potential
and talent. It will also enable early detection of negative emotions
and projection of concealed destructive tendencies in a child, which
can be dealt with by providing various clinical and psychological
treatments and ensuring a conducive atmosphere for strong physical
and mental growth of the child. Such balanced and healthy development
of one's emotional intelligence will lead to evolution of a truly
enlightened citizen. Hence, I would suggest to NIMHANS to undertake
a research programme to determine the correlation between clinical
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 353
data and the performance of individuals in different activities. Such
data over a period of time can culminate in evolving a battery of tests
which can be used by the schools and social organizations for guiding
the children towards their appropriate career path.
NIMHANS is a unique institution, engaged in developing human
resource and medical research. Availability of a powerful combination
of clinical sciences with basic and applied science in one institution
is the core-competence of NIMHANS. The institute has harmoniously
addressed both local needs and national priorities, while partnering
with professionals from within the country and abroad. The reputation
enjoyed by NIMHANS is an ideal launch pad for the passing out
graduates entering into a new career with a self-designed trajectory.
Graduation is indeed a time to celebrate the recent past. It is a
culmination of your hard work, dedication and determination. This
is the time we must think of the future. You should introspect, redefine
your goals and consider how your individual aspirations can lead to
the collective good of our fellow citizens. All of you must ask yourself
a question "what will I be remembered for?" This question will enable
you to set your long-term goal and work for it.
Once again let me congratulate all the graduates passing out from
this institute today and my best wishes to the members of NIMHANS
in their mission of creating health care professionals with state-of-
the-art knowledge, nobility and compassion.
Tele-Medicine for People in Remote Areas
| AM HAPPY to visit Christian Medical College (CMC), Vellore,
and deliver the Dr. Ida Scudder Oration today. On this day I am
reminded of the dedicated service rendered by Dr. Ida Scudder who
started a single bedded hospital in Vellore, which has now grown
into a hospital with over 2000 beds with 117 specializations. As a
gynaecologist she used to go to the villages, meet people, and treat
them. Today people from many parts of the country and other countries
such as Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Myanmar visit the Centre
and seek quality treatment. CMC Vellore has pioneered in the field
of open heart surgery, renal transplant and bone marrow transplant.
It is amazing to find that this hospital employing over 5,000 members
in all including doctors and paramedical professionals, treats 4500
out patients and 2000 in-patients, conducts over 100 operations and
looks after 30 births in a day. In addition CMC gives the country 60
doctors, over 90 post graduate doctors and 23 super specialists. Also,
the CMC trains over 150 nurses and 190 paramedics. This is an
important human resource development activity for the nation. My
greetings to the specialist doctors, nurses and para-medical personnel,
support staff and medical students. I have selected the topic for the
oration today as 4The Research Challenges of Health Care'.
Recently, I met Dr. Charles Cummings of the Johns Hopkins
University Board, and his team. I asked him a question which was in
my mind, "Dr Charles, What made Johns Hopkins a world class
medical research institution in addition to its cherishing societal
missions?" His answer was, "it is due to a great tradition, and it
started with a number of visionaries simultaneously with value system,
focused missions and the nature of working together. The most
Speech on the occasion of Dr. Ida S. Scudder Oration, Christian Medical College,
Vellore, 1 December 2005
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 355
important aspect is the research, research base and the quantity of
clinical data added everyday. This tradition continues even now."
Indeed it is a great message from Dr. Charles. I am sure, every medical
institution in the country should imbibe this culture that comes out
of research tradition, leading to the results of the research reaching
the people in the form of medicare, medicines or vaccines. I recall, in
India one of the leading institutions in Hyderabad L.V. Prasad Eye
Institute has set a tradition of providing quality eye care particularly
with social commitment of 1:1. 1:1 implies one free eye care service
for every paid eye care service provided by the Institute. Also, they
have a tradition of excellent research in ophthalmology and they are
spreading the mission to various parts of the country particularly their
research in stem ceil which has led to the restoration of eyesight to
300 patients with burn-affected eyes.
I realize the research to realization of approved medical products
takes nearly 7 to 10 years. That means: when India in a year invents
say thousands of molecules, at least 10 to 20 should graduate into an
approved medical product. But if it is realized within the country it
will be very cost-effective and also internal wealth generator. Recently,
I have visited a number of public and private sector medical and
pharmaceutical R&D centres. In every laboratory I was very happy
to see a large number of scientists working in the frontier areas of
pharma sector, particularly in the private sector which provides them
strengths to become globally competitive. Our R&D institutions
should take up development of vaccines for malaria, anti-vaccine for
HIV, a robust drug for TB and other water-borne diseases on highest
priority. The great tradition India nurtured over many centuries must
emerge again and multiple health research centres must flourish.
Every country has a specific combination of sanitary conditions,
nutrition, lifestyle, disease pattern and possible solutions. Naturally,
the research has to be nation-specific and also in certain cases region-
specific so that we can provide an integrated solution to the prevention
or cure of a particular disease. In this connection I would like to talk
to you about a strategy adopted in a beautiful hill region in India
which I am fully familiar with.
356 API ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
On 19th October 2002,1 participated in the launching of a Mobile
Clinic and Research Centre in Uttaranchal. This effort was piloted by
the Technology Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council
[TIFAC], the Government of Uttaranchal, Birla Institute of Scientific
Research and many other agencies. After three years of its operation,
I found this mobile clinic has been used in six districts of Uttaranchal
and treated nearly 45,000 patients during this period. Among the
patients treated, 48% belong to the below poverty line category. They
have taken 10,000 ultra sound, 5,600 X-rays, 1800 ECGs and nearly
21,000 lab tests. The mobile clinic has documented the disease profile
of the patients in the region (six districts) which falls into the following
categories: acute peptic ulcer, anaemia, anti-natal, chronic obstructive
pulmonary diseases, hyper tension, pelvic inflammation, renal calculi,
upper respiratory tract infection and worm infection. This type of
analysis has been possible because of computerized system of clinic
management introduced right in the beginning. Also, the mobile clinic
has been used in regions which are normally inaccessible and where
organized medical facility is not available. This, I consider as the
best form of reaching the health care to the neediest people in the
country. This is a low cost solution with committed health care
personnel and institutions. I would recommend to CMC Vellore to
have a mobile clinic moving to different villages located around Vellore
and conduct periodic medicare camps so that the number of patients
coming as out patients will be substantially reduced. The clinical
data provided by this model will be useful for the researchers in the
medical college. Additionally mobile clinic data must be networked
so that the integrated data from various hospitals can provide a definite
direction for health care research. When I was in the J&K border at
Tangdhar and Uri sector, I interacted with the patients in Uri and
specialist doctors in Srinagar through the ISRO telemedicine network
established in these places. A combination of mobile clinic and tele
medicine facility can provide quality medicare to people living in
remote areas. Now I would like to discuss about health status of our
country (India) and specific measures needed for improving the health
India has made considerable progress in its health status since
its Independence and particularly during the last fifteen years. At
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 357
the time of Independence, the life expectancy of an Indian was less
than thirty years. Between 1991-2005, the life expectancy of Indians
has gone up from 58 to 64.35 years, infant mortality has come down
from 87 to 60 deaths per 1000 live births and population growth rate
has decreased from 1.9% to 1.4%. Still infant mortality is very high.
We have to bring it to the level which has been achieved by Kerala
I would like to briefly talk to you on some of the diseases and
actions proposed and future needs. Our experiences will definitely
be shared with the third world developing nations in order to provide
health care for all.
There is an effort to bring the entire country under the Revised
National Tuberculosis Control Programme (RNTCP). So far, 93% of
our country has been brought under this programme and by October,
2006 the entire country will become part of this programme. This
will ensure that at least 75% of the total tuberculosis cases are detected
every year and brought under direct surveillance. The treating agency
must ensure that at least 80% success in fully curing the disease is
achieved within the year. If this regime is followed continuously for
over ten years our tuberculosis load will come down to less than ten
per one lakh of population. For achieving this it is also essential to
work faster on the development and clearance of new drugs which
are in the pipeline.
Modem medicine has always relied on newer scientific inventions.
Many of the world inventions have been used by Indian Health Care
Systems effectively. India has also made significant contributions
in developing drugs that are critically required for India. One of the
achievements comes from a laboratory of the Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research (CSIR). CSIR lab has developed a new
therapeutic molecule for tuberculosis. This molecule has shown the
potential to cure TB in around 2 months, as against the standard treatment
of 6 to 8 months. This breakthrough is very important. After completing
the pre-clinical studies, the molecule transformed into a drug called
Sudo-terb is scheduled to undergo clinical trials in humans. This
development has been done as a public-private partnership involving
358 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
the Lupin, the three CSIR Laboratories, namely, Central Drug Research
Institute, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology and National
Chemical Laboratory, and the University of Hyderabad. It is hoped
that the drug will be in the market soon after the clinical trials. In
addition to the above, there is also a need to develop a more effective
vaccine against tuberculosis. The combined action of surveillance,
detection and disciplined treatment have to work together to ensure
faster cure of existing cases. Prevention of future cases has to be
achieved through R & D efforts of developing new breed of vaccine
and medicines. The collaborative action is needed between health
care personnel, doctors, researchers and the pharmaceutical companies
both in the private and public sectors to accomplish this mission.
Incidence of malaria has reduced from 22 lakh to 18 lakh in the
period 1998-2003. However, the death cases have increased from
644 to 943. I understand that the conventional medicine used for
treatment of malaria namely Chloroquin has become resistant to
Falciparum which causes cerebral malaria. Our scientific community
has developed and produced a drug named Arteether from Artemisinin
which has been found to be an effective cure for cerebral malaria. I *
understand that this drug is being exported to over forty countries.
Also, Ranbaxy has acquired a malarial drug molecule and they are
progressing towards clinical trials. The fully developed drug will be
available in the market soon. This will be another important milestone
in the treatment of malaria.
Over the years I find that in spite of our efforts there is no rapid
reduction in the occurrence of malaria cases in the country. While
taking up new projects it is essential to have multi-faceted inter-sectoral
collaboration between various partners so that the impact assessment
of the project on new types of disease can be foreseen and suitable
preventive action taken to contain the disease. In addition to this we
have to improve the surveillance, develop rapid diagnostic kit and
use the conventional prevention methods of spraying to control the
vector. International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology
in collaboration with Bharat Biotech has developed a vaccine for malaria
which will go for toxicity trials on animals. There is a need to speed
up such projects so that they will benefit the entire community who
are affected by malaria in different parts of the world.
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 359
It is reported that in India the number of HIV infected people is
on the increase. It is critical that the transmission of HIV infection is
prevented. An effective vaccine that can prevent this disease will be
a cost-effective tool for control of infectious diseases. There are three
sub-types of virus classified as A, B and C. I understand that Indian
population is largely affected by sub-type C virus.
There are two candidate vaccines presently considered for use
against sub-type C virus in our country. In view of the urgency of
finding a cost-effective vaccine the expert group reviewed the vaccine
candidate for HIV sub-type C in the pipeline. Adeno-Associated Virus
(AAV)-based vaccine with HIV-1 sub-type C (African strain) developed
by Targetted Genetics Corp, USA was found to be in advanced stage
of test in different parts of the world. This HIV vaccine (tgAAC09) is
now undergoing Phase-I trial for safety and immunogenicity assessment
in healthy HIV uninfected volunteers at National AIDS Research
The Indian vaccine has been developed by scientists from National
Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases in collaboration with National
Aids Research Institute, Pune and Therion Biologies, USA. This is a
recombinant vaccine containing six genes from HIV 1-C strain. This
vaccine was developed from the virus isolated from National Aids
Research Institute, Pune. This will go into Phase-I trial in healthy
uninfected adults at Tuberculosis Research Centre, Chennai during
this year. Both these programmes are being progressed as a joint venture
between ICMR, National Aids Control Organisation (NACO) and
International Aids Vaccine Initiative. In addition to these, two vaccines
- a DNA based vaccine and an SFV vaccine - are also under
Time has now arrived to take up this development in a mission
mode so that an effective vaccine will be available for our country
within the next two years. Simultaneously, I would suggest that the
medical community must start working on the development of anti
vaccines for sub-type A and B also.
The treatment for cancer is prolonged and expensive. A common
man in the rural area may not be able to sustain the financial burden.
360 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
In that respect I am very happy to find that certain institutions like
Karunya Nilayam in Kerala is providing free medicines, free noon
meals and free accommodation to a large number of patients. This is
a very important societal mission.
Karunya Nilayam has initiated a programme of screening of
children in the rural areas and providing total treatment for over hundred
cancer-affected children. Such societal missions must be carried out
by a large number of charitable and philanthropic organisations apart
from Government commitment to remove the suffering of the people
from this dreaded disease. As a first step we can contain the spread
of the disease through education, to know some of the causes needing
lifestyle change and removal of environment hazards. As a second
step citizens can be advised to report immediately to the doctor if
they find anything disturbing in their routine or anatomy. This is
where the periodic screening of all women between the age of 35 and
60 through mammogram and papsmear will help against breast and
pelvic cancer. Advancement in cancer treatment has resulted in the
development of precision radiation and tumor targeted therapies. Latest
technique uses nanotechnology-based genetic transfer. The mobile
clinic can also be used for screening the children in the school and
the women in villages for early detection of cancer.
When I visited Chattisgarh, I was informed by various authorities
that sickle cell anaemia disease is prevalent in certain tribal areas
and even in the adjoining States. I understand over 25 lakh population
suffers from this disease. Life expectancy of this population is low
and it is reported that this disease is a silent killer.
Sickle cell disease is an inherited condition. Two genes for the
sickle haemoglobin must be inherited from one's parents in order to
get the disease. A person who receives a gene for sickle cell disease
from one parent and a normal gene from the other has a condition
called sickle cell trait. Sickle cell trait produces no symptoms or problems
for most people. The severity of sickle cell disease varies tremendously.
Some people with sickle cell disease lead lives that are nearly normal.
Others are less fortunate, and can suffer from a variety of complications.
Some of the common symptoms seen in the patients suffering from
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 361
sickle cell anaemia include (i) anaemia, (ii) intermittent jaundice,
(iii) severe joint pains, and (iv) recurrent infections. These symptoms
appear between the age of four and five, and severity increases with
advancement of age. The available treatment strategies can be divided
into anti-sickling agents, vaso-active drugs, bone marrow transplantation
and gene therapy. Dr. Kmiec had shown that the new gene repair
technology may hold promise as a treatment for sickle cell anaemia
and other diseases by correcting the DNA mutation from which they
arise. The medical researchers have to take up this task in all earnestness
and find a comprehensive treatment for this disease. I am telling
you because I am sure many of the graduates passing out from CMC
may be taking assignments in various parts of the country where this
disease is prevalent. CMC can take up leadership in research to treat
and prevent the disease.
Multi-dimensional solutions are available for management of
the diseases based on my discussion with experts. The solutions include
medicinal treatment using statins, which lowers the cholesterol in
the blood by reducing the production of cholesterol by the liver. Statins
block the enzyme in the liver responsible for making excess cholesterol.
However one has to be careful about the side effects and take adequate
precautions while treating the patients. The second is through
angiography and angioplasty using stents. Advancements in stents
have resulted in the introduction of drug coated stents which hold a
tremendous promise in the near perfect coronary artery disease. I
understand that very soon we may have bio-degradable stents. The
next generation stents may be nano-stents. If the heart blockage is
severe, and we find valve defect and death of cells in the heart due to
less blood supply etc. surgical intervention will be necessary or it
may lead to treatment using stem cells.
We have all witnessed the treatment of cardiovascular disease
moving from very invasive to less invasive methods. In the seventies
bypass surgery was the big news, in the eighties it was balloon
angioplasty and in the nineties it was the stent.
Now, moving a step further is a totally non-invasive treatment -
External Counter Pulsation (ECP), a truly non-operative, non-
pharmaceutical, safe and effective treatment which has made big news
362 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
in the west. ECP is FDA (USA) approved and finds reference in medical
and cardiology textbooks. Many favourable articles have been published
in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology, Cardiovascular
Review Reports, Cardiology, Mayo Clinical Proc., Clinical Cardiology,
Journal of Critical Illness, Journal of External Counter Pulsation, etc.
In India, ECP is available at Sibia Medical Centre, Ludhiana besides
Escort Heart Institute and Research Centre, New Delhi, Peoples General
Hospital, Bhopal, Jamnagar and the International Centre for Cardio
Thoracic and Vascular Diseases, Parumala. This is a ripe area of
research for the doctors and scientists of CMC, Vellore.
Human disorders can be classified into three broad categories.
They are genetic disorders, disorders due to cellular function deficiency,
and disorders arising out of certain pathogens. I recommend intensive
research for developing and producing cost-effective treatment regime
for the above categories of disorder through
(a) Gene therapy and gene chip research,
(b) Stem cell research, and
(c) Combination vaccine and pathogen-specific antibiotics.
This could lead to cost-effective and safe treatment for the needy
and improve the quality of life of mankind on this planet. CMC can
be the leader or partner in some of these research areas.
I would suggest to CMC to concentrate on the following areas
(a) A solution for treatment of mentally challenged children is
not being looked at in an integrated way. CMC may like to
carry out research on the application of stem cell for the
treatment of mentally challenged children.
(b) Research on finding why Indians wherever they are, are
susceptible to cardiac diseases at an early age.
(c) Research for effective treatment and prevention of sickle
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 363
Recently, there was a meeting of cured patients, their doctors
and a few social workers. One important point that emerged during
the interaction was that the relationship between the patient and doctor
extends to patient's family. This, in turn, transmits effective messages
from one family to another family on advice to prevent diseases,
necessity of periodic checks, the dietary habits and the need for life
style changes including exercise for good health. Actually, I believe
this good contact between the doctor and patients is comparable to
that of a teacher and student. I request every doctor of CMC to play
the role of a teacher in advising every family on disease prevention
and methods to lead a healthy life. I hope you will find time for this
The mission of offering the best available patient care, the most
sophisticated education to physicians and patients and being the leader
in medicare is indeed a very challenging task. This mission demands
the highest of the human capabilities in intelligence, innovation and
My best wishes to all the members of CMC Vellore in their mission
of providing equitable health care to all the citizens of this region
and developing quality health care human resource for the nation.
Traditional Medicine System for
Removal of Human Misery
J AM INDEED delighted to inaugurate the Ayurveda Hospital
Complex and to interact with the students. My greetings to the
Principal, physicians, researchers, staff, health planners, students and
all those associated with this Ayurveda Hospital for their excellent
contribution in promoting the cause of integrated medicine for removal
of human misery and pain.
This hospital, I understand, is contributing in the Ayurveda research
and also medical care. Kerala has been a leader of Ayurveda system
of medicine for centuries. The traditional eight branches of Ayurveda
treat various types of diseases and provide personalized treatment to
individuals. Ancient knowledge is a unique resource of India, for it
has the treasure of a minimum of 5000 years of civilization. I am
delighted to note that with the experience of a 139-bed hospital the
institution is now expanding with an additional 350 beds.
The contributions made by Ayurveda Hospital in providing
effective remedies for various kinds of ailments such as paralysis,
piles, fistula, ulcers, discogenic diseases, degenerative diseases of
central nervous system, allergic diseases, eye diseases, HIV/AIDS,
TB and Cancer are indeed noteworthy. It is also important that the
hospital and training college are integrated. I am sure the clinical
data so far recorded will lead to good research in the field of discovering
molecules leading to ayurvedic medicine. I would like to talk on the
topic "Traditional Medicine: Our Strength".
I would like to share my experiences that I had while I was in
Anna University, Chennai. One of them resulted in getting a patent
Address at the inauguration of the Ayurveda Hospital Complex and Interaction with
the Students. Emakulam. Kerala. 17 December 2005
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 365
for a new molecule discovered from a herb as an anti-cancer drug.
This came out of the fusion of two great minds, one was a bio
technologist and the other was a traditional siddha medical practitioner.
The traditional system of medicine like Ayurveda, Siddha etc. have
advocated and practised preventive and curative medicinal recipes
specific to individuals. The body, mind, food and environment were
looked at holistically to suggest a preventive or curative approach to
health. Medicinal plants offer enormous scope for development of
drugs. We need to create database of traditional medicinal plants for
specific bioactivity and lead for development of new drugs.
The convergence of bioscience and IT into bioinformatics has
given the thrust to researchers for genomics-based drug discovery
and development. Pressure is mounting on the pharmaceutical
companies to reduce or at least control costs, and have a growing
need for new informatics tools to help manage the influx of data from
genomics, and turn that data into tomorrow's drugs.
Bioinformatics data play a vital role and are emerging as a business
model for the medical and pharmaceutical sector. Key areas such as
gene prediction, data mining, protein structure modelling and prediction,
protein folding and stability, macromolecular assembly and modelling
of complex biological systems are thriving and IT has a major role to
play in these areas in bringing the tools to manage the high throughput
experiments and the data they generate, and sharing and integrating
all the data in a meaningful way resulting in the detailed models of
complex systems, particularly biological pathways.
Our country is rich in human resources, particularly of scientists,
doctors, technologists and engineers. The basic infrastructure is available
for advanced research. The need of the hour is to network the existing
facilities and expertise with commitment and conviction to augment
and facilitate the pace of research and development. There are
tremendous opportunities for technologists to work for an 'Integrated
Health For All' in a mission mode which can be suitably evolved for
implementation. I would suggest to Ayurveda Hospital to carry out
collaborative research with other renowned Ayurvedic and Allopathic
hospitals so that the diagnosis and treatment database will increase
366 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
and lead to sharing of knowledge and good medical practices. The
combination of Ayurveda Hospital and the college should enable to
establish the connectivity to the Ayurvedic research laboratories and
drug manufacturers. This practice will reinforce good teaching. Good
research is essential for good teaching.
On 19th October 2002,1 participated in the launching of a Mobile
Clinic and Research Centre in Uttaranchal. This effort was piloted by
the Technology Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council
[TIFAC], the Government of Uttaranchal, Birla Institute of Scientific
Research and many other agencies. After three years of its operation,
I found this mobile clinic has been used in six districts of Uttaranchal
and treated nearly 45,000 patients during this period. Among the
patients treated, 48% belong to the below poverty line category. They
have taken 10,000 ultra sound, 5,600 X-rays, 1800 ECGs and nearly
21,000 lab tests. The mobile clinic has documented the disease profile
of the patients in the region (six districts) which falls into the following
categories: acute peptic ulcer, anaemia, anti-natal, chronic obstructive
pulmonary diseases, hyper tension, pelvic inflammation, renal calculi,
upper respiratory tract infection and worm infection. This type of
analysis has been possible because of computerized system of clinic
management introduced right in the beginning. Also, the mobile clinic
has been used in regions which are normally inaccessible and where
organized medical facility is not available. This, I consider as the
best form of reaching the health care to the neediest people in the
state. This is a low cost solution with committed health care personnel
and institutions. I would recommend Ayurveda Hospital to have a
mobile clinic moving to different villages located in Kerala, particularly
hilly regions and conduct periodic medicare camps so that the number
of patients coming as outpatients will substantially reduce. And research
potential of the hospital will increase.
This Ayurveda Hospital with its college can take a mission to
scientifically bring out a document on the diseases for which Ayurvedic
treatment gave the cure. Based on this experience, even the syllabus
in the Ayurveda College and the treatment can be configured. What
is needed now in the country today is the evolution of treatment for
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 367
the disease like HIV and HIV-TB combination. If Ayurveda research
and practice can give a solution, it is a great contribution to the world.
Since every one of you is involved in the noble profession of
removing the pain of the people, you can also play a vital role in
preventing ailments through proper health education to the patient as
well as to his or her relatives and friends through lifestyle intervention.
This can consist of a proper diet with low fat and high fibre, regular
aerobic exercise like walking and stress management through Yoga,
meditation and other methods. This can help in preventing the recurrence
of the disease in the patient as well as promoting health awareness at
all levels. When you remove the pains of the people, the patient becomes
part and parcel of you and considers you almost as God. Hence, the
patient will definitely accept your health education considering you
as the most respected guru. Every patient receives his family members,
relatives and friends when he is receiving health care in the hospital.
That is the occasion where you can give this message of a healthy
lifestyle to all of them.
I call upon the youth and Ayurvedic medical professionals
assembled here to proceed confidently and chart your own course in
achieving excellence in your chosen field. In the Western Ghats there
is invaluable bio-diversity, which has been well documented. This
region has been the cradle for Ayurveda and I wish you many more
success in your endeavours. With these words, I inaugurate the 350
bed Ayurveda Hospital Complex.
My best wishes to all the students and Faculty Members in their
mission of removing the pain of the people through traditional medical
system which is India's civilizational heritage.
J AM INDEED delighted to visit the Swami Vivekanand National
Institute of Rehabilitation Training and Research (NIRTAR) in
Cuttack and interact with you all. I realize that this complex has
come out of the pioneering work of Dr. Balu Sankaran. My greetings
to the team who have worked consistently for the last three decades
to realize this complex and to provide the benefits of health care to
patients with orthopaedic disabilities, hearing disabilities, congenital
deformities and leprosy. I am happy that the institute has built up
infrastructure for carrying out the rehabilitation surgeries, physiotherapy
and occupational therapy units, workshop for fabricating orthotic and
prosthetic aids and visual and psychological counselling. I would
like to discuss on the topic "Technology can remove the pain".
Rehabilitation process should aim at enabling persons to reach
and maintain their optimal physical, sensory, intellectual, psychological
and social functional level. It has to include measures to provide and
restore functions to compensate for the loss or absence of a function.
It should include from more basic and general rehabilitation to goal-
oriented activities, for instance vocational rehabilitation.
Training is an important educational mechanism to remove the
disabilities. We have recently come across one interview with a wrestler
who is knee-less and hand-less. The training from childhood, will
power to be on his own and above all the willingness of benefactors
with love and compassion to go all out to help such special persons,
demonstrate that special abilities can be built.
Dr Stephen Hawking is one of the most accomplished physicists
of our time. This great scholar was affected by motor neuron disease
Address at the Swami Vivekananda National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and
Research (NIRTAR), Cuttack, 27 December 2005
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELFARE 369
which deteriorated so much that it threatened his research career. His
speech became slurry and many people predicted that he will not live
to complete his Ph D. His determination and the help that he received
from modern technology made sure that he not only lived to complete
his Ph.D but also made the most enviable contribution to Physics, the
string theory. He is a great living example in radiating the confidence
to win in the midst of multiple physical disabilities.
I have experienced that the composite product technologies helped
the disabled to have light weight artificial limbs or FROs (Floor Reaction
Orthosis) - Calipers at an affordable cost and at one tenth weight in
composite material. After the development of FRO, many camps have
been conducted for fitting FRO's including Chandipur, Balasore district.
I could see the happiness of the recipients in these camps because of
the lightness of the FRO. Now I would like to narrate my experience
of visiting an FRO Camp at Belgaum for providing rehabilitation to
polio affected and special children.
A seven year old boy Master Bhimappa, son of a labourer belonging
to Belgaum District, Karnataka studying in primary school had lost
both his lower limbs in a road accident. He wrote me a letter seeking
help for rehabilitation. Then three of my friends Dr. A.S. Pillai, Dr.
L. Narendranath, and Shri Mayank Diwedi, went into action.
Dr. Narendranath, Orthopaedic Surgeon, NIMS, Hyderabad
examined the boy - diagnosed and prescribed bilateral above-knee
prosthesis for him. Sthree Sakthi of Lions club of Belgaum came all
out to help the boy by taking him to Hyderabad and treatment
commenced on fitment and gait training. With this prosthesis fitment,
Master Bhimappa walked confidently and was able to negotiate distances
comfortably. Based on this experience Dr. Vijayalakshmi, Sthree Sakthi
of Lions Club sought help for providing light weight calipers to many
polio affected children of Belgaum region. Our team of doctors and
engineers went into action. Lions Club organized camps to screen
the children for fitment trial and over six hundred children were fitted
with FROs on 15th October 2004. After this event a big camp was
conducted in Loni on 15th October 2005 where thousand children
have been rehabilitated. This shows the nobility of heart of all the
370 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
participants in this mission. I would suggest to the members of Swami
Vivekanand National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and Research
to conduct such FRO camps in the rural areas of Orissa.
I am confident that the NGOs and Government functionaries in
other areas of the country can follow this model for providing relief
and rehabilitation to the differently-abled children and bring smiles
I visited Tanzania and South Africa during September 2004. My
programme included a visit to Uhuru Primary School in Dar-Es-Salaam,
capital of Tanzania where inclusive training is provided to physically
challenged children along with other students. Uhuru Primary School
set up in 1921 also admits children with multiple disabilities along
with other children. This I consider a great social cause.
Prior to our visit to Tanzania, Smt Meira Kumar, Minister for
Social Justice and Empowerment had sent a team of doctors and experts
with appropriate systems like wheel chairs, hearing aids, prosthetic
kits, headphones and Braille slates to Dar-Es-Salaam. Nearly 500
Tanzanian children were provided the assistive devices like hearing
aid, tricycles, folding canes and Braille slates. Our team also trained
them for using these devices in their day-to-day activities.
When I reached the school on 13th September 2004, it was a
moving sight to see physically and visually challenged children trying
to keep in tune with their school mates. A band was at hand playing
rhythmic tunes on which the children were singing and dancing to
celebrate the arrival of the ability. I realize whether in India or anywhere,
the abilities provided in an environment of happiness and thankfulness
engulfed everyone. Now I would like to discuss about hearing impairment.
Regarding the profound hearing disability, treatment is undertaken
only in very few medical institutions since it needs a special device
called cochlear implant. When the child doesn't have the hearing
capacity it leads to dumbness. Cochlear implant coupled with computer
aided training helps the deaf and dumb individuals to regain near
normal hearing/speaking capabilities. Basically it is bypassing the
damaged inner ear portion by replacing its functions with an electronic
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 371
system having external mike, speech processing circuit, transmitter
and a receiver. The receiver is implanted below the ear. The receiver
has an electrode, which will be inserted into the cochlear portion of
the ear. Speech processor processes the input audio signals and converts
them into electrical signals in various channels. The transmitter transmits
these signals to the implant's multi-channel electrode, which terminates
in various points of the cochlear.
The latest cochlear implant technology, contour advance, recently
introduced in India, is specifically designed to protect the small and
delicate cochlea structures during surgery. This helps to preserve any
residual hearing. Its curved shape also provides more focused stimulation
of the hearing nerve for better quality outcomes. The further research
in cochlear implant must lead to design and production of cochlear
implants which will need minimum invasive procedures for fitment.
There are certain groups working in different parts of the country on
treatment for hearing impairment using cochlear implant and also the
development of cost-effective cochlear implant in the country. I would
suggest to Swami Vivekanand National Institute of Rehabilitation
Training and Research to become a partner in this programme.
Some time back, the National Institute for Mentally Handicapped,
Hyderabad, had conducted a sports meet for all the physically and
mentally handicapped children at National Stadium Hyderabad. In
one race, nine contestants, all physically or mentally disabled, assembled
at the starting line for the 100 metre race. At the starting signal, they
all started out, not exactly in a dash, but with a relish to run the race
to the finish and win, i.e. all others except one little boy who stumbled
on the asphalt, tumbled over a couple of times, and began to cry. The
other eight heard the boy cry. They slowed down and looked back.
Then they all turned around and went back ... every one of them. One
girl with Down's syndrome bent down and kissed him and said, "This
will make it better." Then all nine linked their arms together and walked
together and finally reached the destination. Everyone in the stadium
stood, and the cheering went on for several minutes. People who were
there are still telling the story. Why? Because deep down we know
this one thing: What matters in this life is more than winning for
ourselves. What matters in this life is helping others win, even if it
372 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
means slowing down and changing our course. I would say that you
do not have to slow down. Rather by helping difficult areas, the feedback
will make you go faster. If you pass this on, we may be able to change
our hearts as well as someone else's. "A candle loses nothing by lighting
My best wishes to Swami Vivekanand National Institute of
Rehabilitation Training and Research for success in their mission of
providing rehabilitation care to special people particularly in the rural
areas. May God bless you.
Twin Challenges for Health Care
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in the inauguration of the
Paediatric Oncology Department of the Mahavir Cancer Sansthan,
Patna. I greet the organizers, distinguished doctors, guests and dedicated
nursing and paramedical staff on this important occasion. I appreciate
the missionary spirit and dedication of the institute team in providing
high quality and compassionate medical services and care to all sections
of our society. I would like to talk on the topic "Removing the pain
I would like to share a few experiences of people and their pain
and possible solutions. Last year, I was at the Centre for Cellular &
Molecular Biology at Hyderabad. I met hundreds of young scientists
working on the genetic origin and manifestations of diseases, particularly
cancer. The young scholars very enthusiastically shared with me their
knowledge of molecular biology and cellular research. They told me
about the information encrypted on the DNA in the cell nucleus and
how both problems and solutions to the human lives reside on the
software that nature has embedded in each life it creates.
Cancer, unlike many other diseases that come from the external
factors, like infections, lifestyles and other environmental and
physiological stressors, primarily emanates from within the cell. The
life software embedded in the DNA material gets mutated and starts
growing in a way that is not in line with the surrounding cells. Many
times when immune systems are impaired, life turns against itself.
The tragedy becomes unfathomable when it happens at an early age.
Address at the inauguration of the Paediatric Oncology Department, Mahavir Cancer
Sansthan, Patna, 30 December 2005
374 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
The intensified research in the area of DNA coding definitely will be
able to provide the diagnostic and treatment solutions.
Some time back, I met one gentleman whose 6-year-old grand
child was on periodic blood transfusion for Thallasemia. The permanent
solution, doctors told me, was a bone marrow transplant. The bone
marrow of the child was not matching even between siblings and the
parents. Unmatched bone marrow transplant is not done in India, I
was told, and even in the West it is undertaken only in experimental
situations. I met the child who was unaware of the time bomb that
was ticking inside him. I prayed for him, for that was the only thing I
could do. What can we do to strengthen the doctors' capabilities in
such a situation? I think research on stem cell and its application
towards cancer treatment holds great promise. May be clinicians getting
involved in this research will lead to a breakthrough.
Treatment of cancer is very often multi-pronged involving unique
combinations of radiation, chemotherapy and surgery. Genetic diagnosis
can help to take good decisions while charting the course of therapy.
On the drug side, instead of looking for agents that kill dividing cells,
researchers are now looking for agents that encourage cells to get
destroyed. Inside a growing tumor, the blood supply can be made to
run short suffocating the deformed cells. Many drugs, called angiogenic
agents, are now being used. However most of these drugs are imported
and are very expensive. Industry-hospital-research institution consortia
need to be established to develop and produce the affordable indigenous
Chemotherapy is often hazardous. It ends up destroying healthy
cells in the vicinity and in the metabolic path of the targeted cancerous
ones. A firm in Pune has developed algorithms describing interaction
between normal cells, malignant cells and nutrients. The algorithms
also take into account the Pharma-co-kinetics of the drug. Together
with inputs on patient's age, height and weight and the type and volume
of the tumor, the mathematical model can design an optimal drug
schedule, minimizing the side effects. The type and volume of tumor
can be automatically deduced by a combination of imaging and
laboratory investigations. Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scans
HEALTH AND SOCIAL WELLARE 375
offer powerful techniques in this area. This is a good example of how
advances in many disciplines of science such as biomedical engineering,
image processing, control systems, mathematical modelling and
pharmacology are helping in the development of better and effective
treatment for cancer patients.
Recently, while I was in Kerala, I inaugurated a project called
Karunya Nilayam. As a part of this project children in the rural areas
are being screened and provided total treatment for cancer. Since
Mahavir Cancer Sansthan is starting a Paediatric Oncology Department,
I would suggest to the Sansthan to nominate a team of doctors to visit
village schools and screen the children. This will enable early detection
of cancer. The detected cases can be brought to the hospital for treatment.
This will be a very important dimension for treating the needy children
Unlike adults the childhood cases of cancer are successfully
treatable, as the types of cancers occurring in childhood are more
responsive to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. However, the success
depends on the availability of adequate nutrition to the child. Nutritional
support should become part of therapy especially in rural areas. This
will decrease complications, improve immunological status and improve
survival. It is important that nutrition support is tailored to meet the
needs of the individual child.
There are a number of hospitals providing paediatric cancer
treatment in different cities of the country. It will be useful to network
these cancer treatment centres enabling exchange of experiences among
specialists leading to the delivery of best possible treatment to Bihar
children. This type of interaction will also generate confidence among
medical community to undertake treatment of complex cancer cases.
During one of my visits I found that cancer centres have immunologists,
physiologists and psychologists working together. This model could
also be followed by Mahavir Cancer Sansthan to provide psychological
support to the children facilitating faster recovery.
Creation of Paediatric Cancer Centre at Mahavir Cancer Sansthan
having 50 exclusive beds for children is a significant step forward in
376 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
dealing with the most challenging health care problem of this region
particularly of children. However, it is essential to have connectivity
of general practitioners with this centre to make a major impact in
terms of reaching the needy as well as helping them out. The mission
of offering the best available patient care, the most sophisticated
education to physicians and patients and being the leader in the cancer
research is indeed a very challenging task. This mission demands
the highest of the human capabilities in intelligence, innovation and
perseverance. Above all a mind to serve the needy is important.
Let our new generation have good health and prosperity and not
succumb to the needless waste of human life. Cancer prevention and
cancer cure are indeed the twin challenges to the medico and health
care community. Challenge transforms into mission of pain removal
and thereby provides useful life that is close to God.
With these words, I inaugurate the Paediatric Oncology Department
of Mahavir Cancer Sansthan. My best wishes to the doctors and other
members of this Sansthan for success in their mission of providing
quality health care to the Bihar children.

Education, Art and Culture
Knowledge - Prime Mover of
J AM INDEED delighted to inaugurate the International Conference
on Digital Libraries (ICDL) 2004 organized by the Department of
Culture in partnership with The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI).
My greetings to the organizers, all stake holders in the digitization
and the knowledge business, library and information science
professionals, e-learning community and the participants of the
conference. I am happy to see that there are many distinguished
technologists and library professionals gathered here from all over
the world. You have all made significant contributions to create Digital
Libraries in your own country and in your own sphere of expertise.
We have many initiatives in India including the Digital Library of
India Portal. I would request all of you to evolve methodologies to
share all our Digital Contents with no barriers. This will truly speak
of the technology as an integrator of people. I urge all of you to pledge
that we will share information of value freely with those citizens in
the less privileged nations across the world. I would like to talk to
this audience on "Digital Library and its Multidimensions".
Knowledge has always been the prime mover for prosperity. A
knowledge society is one of the basic foundations for the development
of any nation. Knowledge has many forms and it is available at many
places. The acquisition of knowledge has therefore been the thrust
area throughout the world and sharing the experience of knowledge
is a unique culture of our country. Digital Library is a new instrument,
which can spread the knowledge nearly at the speed of light. India is
a nation endowed with natural and competitive advantages as also
certain distinctive competencies. But these are scattered in isolated
pockets and the awareness on these is inadequate. During the last
few centuries the world has undergone a change from agriculture society,
Speech while Inaugurating the International Conference on Digital Libraries-2004,
New Delhi, 24 February 2004
380 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
where natural labour was the critical factor, to industrial society where
the management of technology, capital and labour provided the
competitive advantage. In the 21 st century, a new society is emerging
where knowledge is the primary production resource instead of capital
and labour. Efficient utilisation of existing knowledge can create
comprehensive wealth for the nation in the form of better health,
education, infrastructure etc. for improving the quality of life. Ability
to create and maintain the knowledge infrastructure, develop knowledge
workers and enhance their productivity through creation, growth and
use of new knowledge will be the key factors in deciding the prosperity
of this Knowledge Society. Whether a nation has emerged as a
knowledge society or not is judged by the way the country effectively
deals with knowledge creation and knowledge deployment.
I was studying different dimensions of knowledge society, and
how would it be different from the industrial economy. In the knowledge
economy the objective of a society changes from fulfilling the basic
needs of all round development to empowerment. The education system
instead of going by text book teaching will be promoted by creative,
interactive self learning - formal and informal with focus on values,
merit and quality. The workers instead of being skilled or semi-skilled
will be knowledgeable, self-empowered and flexibly skilled. The type
of work instead of being structured and hardware driven will be less
structured and software driven. Management style will emphasize
more on delegation rather than giving command. Impact on environment
and ecology will be strikingly less compared to industrial economy.
Finally, the economy will be knowledge driven and not industry driven.
Knowledge Society has two very important components driven
by societal transformation and wealth generation. The societal
transformation is on education, health care, agriculture and governance.
1 hese will lead to employment generation, high productivity and rural
prosperity. How do we do that?
The wealth generation is a very important task for the nation,
which has to be woven around national competencies such as
information technology, bio-technology, space technology, weather
forecasting, disaster management, tele-medicine and tele-education,
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 381
technologies to produce native knowledge products, service sector
and infotainment. These technologies and management structures have
to work together to generate knowledge society.
Evolution of policy and administrative procedures, changes in
regulatory methods, identification of partners and most importantly
creation of young and dynamic leaders are the components to be in
place. In order to generate wealth, which is the second component
for establishing a knowledge society, it is essential that simultaneously
a citizen-centric approach to evolution of business policy, user-driven
technology generation and intensified industry-lab-academy linkages
have also to be established in every country.
The systematic process of finding, selecting, organizing, distilling
and presenting information improves an employee's comprehension
in a specific area of interest. Knowledge management helps an
organization to gain insight and understanding from its own experience.
Specific knowledge management activities help focus the organization
on acquiring, storing and utilizing knowledge for problem solving,
dynamic learning, strategic planning and decision making. It also
prevents intellectual assets from decay, adds to firm intelligence and
Knowledge creation has two dimensions, one is explicit knowledge
and the other one is implicit knowledge. The explicit knowledge comes
from published books, written materials, proceedings, presentations
etc., whereas the implicit knowledge is derived through the systematic
observation and capturing of data from the tacit knowledge available
among the individuals in the organization, through their approach to
problem solving, bottle-neck removal, goals setting, interactions etc.
We need a systematic mechanism to capture this knowledge to make
the organization a truly learning organization which makes use of
existing knowledge judiciously and efficiently.
Digital library is an important component for capturing the
explicit knowledge. This has to be supplemented with the implicit
knowledge to the digital library system, which will eventually get
transformed into a knowledge management system. Let us study how
the digital library influences knowledge management in India through
382 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
research, design and development. This may be relevant to other
There is a mission of digital library web portal to create a portal
for digital library of India piloted by the Ministry of Information
Technology (MIT) with IISc and Carnegie Mellon University as partners
for fostering creativity and free access to all human knowledge. This
digital library as a first step will create a free-to-read searchable
collection of one million books by 2005 in India. This library was
launched in 2003. Prof. N. Balakrishnan, Chief Coordinator of Digital
Library of India informs me that so far 20 centres are operational
throughout the country, and over 50,000 books have been digitized
of which nearly 30,000 are in 9 Indian languages. In the library of
Rashtrapati Bhavan, which is part of the Digital Library of India, we
have so far digitized over one million pages and also we are digitizing
our old official records leading to e-governance implementation. The
data will be available for use by different institutions in the country
and abroad, depending upon their needs. The programme is
progressing in the right direction, but it needs an impetus to meet the
When I visited Bulgaria, we had an opportunity to present the
work on Digital Library of India. The Indology department at the
Sofia University which is doing seminal work expressed a keen interest
in our Indian language books which number over 30,000 currently.
In a recent follow-up visit, I understand that our Minister for
Communication and Information Technology, Dr. Arun Shourie has
presented them with a CD giving the titles and contents pages of all
the books that we currently have in our Digital Library Portal and
had requested them to select the books that they needed so that the
copies of those books in digital form could be made on a few 250
giga bytes disks attached to a personal computer and given to them.
This small PC with two disks can hold more than 20,000 books -
what is needed for a reasonably sized library. This sets the trend towards
making personalized and affordable Digital Libraries for specialized
use, which form a sub-set of the main Digital Library of India.
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 383
I would like to share with you my thoughts on my home library.
Wherever I turn in any direction, all the selected books in my library
invite and tempt me to read. They are my friends. Digital library has
to be user friendly and should give equitable access to explicit
information, irrespective of place, educational or economic status.
Digital Library of India will unite the institutions and the people.
Digital library is where the past meets the present and creates a future.
I understand that the participating organizations in this mission
of the Digital Library of India are storing the information locally and
are also sending them to the Central Servers. What we need at this
time is also concurrent measures to make very useful and highly user-
friendly interfaces. This will make the Digital Library a friend of
every one and its utility would enhance manyfold. The organizers of
this conference have given me the details of many initiatives for
digitization across the country and abroad. These should be integrated
so that there is inter-operability across the Digital Libraries Initiatives.
The future Digital Libraries would have speech interface so that
the user could interact with the information and will be language
independent. Though this technology world over is progressing, still
many more things have to be done. I would urge the learned audience
to work in close collaboration to ensure introduction of Natural Interfaces
to the Digital Libraries world over.
Digital Libraries are not the Digital Equivalents of the present-
day library. They would include, besides the books, manuscripts and
journals, information and our heritage in all other forms including
speech, folk songs, paintings and carvings. It is important that we
take on this mission of integrating all forms of knowledge and culture
into our Digital Library.
India has rich information relating to literature, music, traditional
system of medicine and science embedded in palm leaves. It is necessary
to search, understand and preserve this valuable information. Merely
scanning the palm leaves would not be very useful. The number of
people who can read the palm leaves and interpret the meanings, identify
the plants and stones mentioned in the palm leaves is dwindling. Even
384 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
those few who can read, cannot write very well, that too may not be
fluent in entering into the computer in Digital Forms. The Optical
Character Recognition of these ancient scripts is also a very tough
problem, almost intractable technically. I suggest that for every palm
leaf scanned, we record in audio the information read by the experts.
We can then put these on the web and invite other experts to provide
free and fair commentary and validate every palm leaf data. This data
can also be used for creating a new generation of palm leaf reading
experts - a species that has almost vanished.
The digitization initiative has picked up momentum in the country;
this is the time we have to make consistent national policies and
procedures, which will lead to effective management and control of
the data leading to enhancement of national knowledge base like what
we have done in IT. Policy makers should take into account the
standardization requirements, inter-operability, copyright issues,
classification of documents and selection and use of the number of
library information systems available with various organizations in
the country in different standards. I would recommend deliberation
of this issue in the conference and constitution of a multi-disciplinary
task force for working out the draft policy document for implementation.
The policy should take into account the dynamics of the web services
technology and keep provision for on-line improvement and variation
in future digital library systems. The task force should have access to
all available resources so that they can ensure prevention of duplication
We have to create a Knowledge Management Grid with the Central
Digital Library Data Centre equipped with the comprehensive Virtual
Digital Library and Knowledge Management System to which all the
participating organizations are connected with broadband along with
Internet connectivity. When we are in the process of digitizing millions
of books we have to plan for the infrastructure and storage requirements
across the country with disaster recovery facility.
Connectivity is strength, connectivity is wealth, and connectivity
is progress. For enabling knowledge connectivity in our rural areas,
we need to have a comprehensive plan for developing new infrastructure
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 385
for extending the digital library services in regional languages. These
include development of OCR (Optical Character Recognition) Software
in all the Indian languages, language independent operating system,
database servers, search engines, web servers and messaging servers.
This will enable the digital library initiative to percolate to the rural
masses in the form of e-governance, tele-education and tele-medicine.
This has to be done in a mission mode with the active participation of
government, educational institutions, R&D organizations along with
private sector enterprises. Here lies the challenge. It is a fertile research
ground for all participants and educational institutions - a large number
of doctorates can be produced in this area alone to push the frontiers
of knowledge in Language Independent Digital Library (LIDL) and
the language independent infrastructure software initiatives.
School children have been experiencing difficulty in getting
textbooks in time, especially for the primary and secondary classes.
It will be useful to digitize and store the textbooks in the library,
which can be accessed by the students whenever required. This
additional facility will enable easy availability of books to the students
for instant reference and study through Internet and intranet access.
In India, we have the greatest wealth of publicly funded books for
schools and colleges. For example the National Book Trust of India
and NCERT have many books in almost all the Indian languages. If
we bring these to the Digital Library with periodical updating it will
enable effective implementation of Right to Education Bill for our
Children. This can be an outsourced service for the educational
We need to integrate the tele-education system with the Digital
Library, so that the students can read and refer to the books suggested
by the teacher from a distant location through on-line e-leaming services.
There are large numbers of files and records occupying valuable
space in our State and Central Government offices. It is essential to
segregate the important files which have to be preserved for a long
duration. These segregated files have to be digitized and stored in the
digital library. This will enable easy search, faster location of the
data and also release huge space occupied by physical cupboards in
386 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
our offices. In addition to this, the present data must be digitized and
used in the workflow within the e-governance implementation. For
this task, proper encryption system must be in place.
Land records have to be digitized and verified with satellite imagery
and stored, which needs to be linked with e-governance applications
for issue, transfer, conversions and additions and deletions. It should
be linked with the revenue collection, estate management, and municipal
records. Digitization and information flow has to go parallel to get
the real advantage of e-governance workflow in the land records and
For India, the preparation of reliable voters' list and its maintenance
is an important governance activity. Digital data of a voter should be
made available on-line over the Internet for all the States and Union
Territories as a digital book for reference. Each State should have a
dedicated site for presentation of the data accessible to all voters as
well as election officers for verification. We should collect the voters'
list through various mechanisms such as palm tops, desktops connected
to Internet on-line with the biometric authentication and photographs
of the voters. This is to be stored in a central data centre in each State
which is connected to the national main data centre to enable issue of
a single and unique code for each voter. It should be dynamically
updated based on the movement of people wherever they go. We need
to link the data of Registrar General and Census Commissioner with
the voter's data bank, which will proactively provide the data of
new entrants into the voters' list and delete data of the persons
after life seizure. May this effort be the forerunner for multipurpose
National ID Card. The Copyright Act was evolved when the rate of
generation of new books and journals was low and it prescribed the
protection period as fifty years in India. Similar are the time limits in
other countries. In this millennium when the rate of flow of new books/
journals has increased substantially, there is a need to have a re-look
at the lock-in period of copyright documents. This International
Conference could initiate action for reducing the copyright duration
Digital Library is a national mission. We should see that all the
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 387
schools, colleges, and universities digitize their libraries in their own
native languages and connect to the outside world within the next
four years. We have to ensure availability of fibre optic cables, satellite
communication and wireless infrastructure especially in remote areas.
It is also essential to realize high bandwidth technology like Multiple
10 Giga Bits connectivity across the country. Above all, just like I
see in my library the book titles attracting me, I would like the first
page of the Digital Library on my Laptop to have SDI (Selective
Dissemination of Information) profile of individuals or schools/colleges.
May you be a master authority who can make use of the cumulative
knowledge of the society through the digital library. May the proceedings
of this International Conference on Digital Libraries 2004, reinforce
our efforts in transforming nations into knowledge societies leading
to their faster development and growth.
Creative Art Ignites the Minds
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in the Golden Jubilee
celebrations of the Lalit Kala Akademi. My greetings to the Chairman
and members of the Akademi, creative artists and distinguished guests.
I understand that the Lalit Kala Akademi has made a remarkable
contribution in nurturing creative talents in classical art, contemporary
art and folk and tribal art hidden in different parts of the country.
Lalit Kala artists, many of you have beautiful minds. Beautiful minds
are the source of creativity. Creativity generates happy, divine paintings,
sculptures. The world art community has known many artists. Shri
Ram Kumar, Shri S.H. Raza, Shri Amarnath Saigal, Sculptor, Shri
MF Hussain, and Chintamani Kar, Graphics Artist, and many are well
Creativity is present in many minds located in various parts of
the country. Providing an opportunity to express their creative thoughts
and the appreciation of the thought by enlightened persons is a means
to promote higher level of creativity among the artists. This aspect
has been done very successfully by Lalit Kala Akademi through national
exhibitions, triennale India and circulating exhibition
I understand, recently an exhibition was exclusively done for
the north-eastern region where hundred selected artists of the region
participated with their art products. All these products were unique
and attracted the attention of art lovers. Such exhibition should not
only enable promotion of the creativity of the individual but also result
in establishment of an enterprise in the region, which can act as a
wealth generator for the state. Lalit Kala Akademi can promote launching
of such enterprises in various regions and facilitate the artists to become
contributors. This approach will enable preservation of the traditional
Address at The Golden Jubilee Celebrations of Lalit Kala Akademi, New Delhi,
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 389
art, promote further creativity and also become a revenue generator
for the artists and the state. During my visit to villages in Nagaland
and Arunachal Pradesh, I realized that every home in the villages
was standing as a symbol of folk art and culture.
In Rashtrapati Bhavan we conducted a painting competition
for special children belonging to four different organisations. The
children were brought to the Mughal Garden and asked to draw their
visualization of the Rashtrapati Bhavan being in that environment.
All the 200 children who participated in that exhibition drew wonderful
paintings depicting the perception. Some of the paintings were
exceptional. Many of the children who participated came from slum
areas of Delhi. A jury selected three best paintings. I was very happy
to commend the young artists. The jury mentioned that the children
were extremely talented and they can excel if they are provided a
right ambience and training. Some of these paintings we used in our
new year greetings card. We have also created an art gallery where
all the paintings received by me from children from all over India are
displayed as exhibits. Creativity is in action there. This gallery is
visited by all the children coming to Rashtrapati Bhavan and acts as
creative aid for the children. Also we have beautiful artistic sculptures
in marbles and other materials in Rashtrapati Bhavan. We don't have
the details of the sculptors, when it was made and what is the theme
of the sculpture. The artistic community may like to study and give
I would like to recall my visit to the National Museum of History
and Art gallery in Sofia the capital city of Bulgaria in October last.
National Museum of History is one of the largest history museums
on the Balkans with 5,33,000 objects and largest archaeological and
historical archive. It contains material remains from ancient and
mediaeval cultures in the Bulgarian lands. I was amazed to see the
implements and products which had been used before 5000 B.C. They
buried their kith and kin with gold and silver. I also saw various forms
of art and sculpture. It reminded me of our civilizational heritage and
made me realize the scientific and cultural similarities, which unites
390 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
I was impressed and inspired when I visited the National Art
Gallery in Bulgaria. There I saw an exhibition of paintings, mostly
done by Bulgarian painters. I also saw 100th birth anniversary exposition
of the famous Bulgarian painter Zlatyu Boyadzhiev. Hundreds of
paintings were done by him using his right hand as done normally. I
was told that his right hand subsequently was paralyzed. But the
indomitable spirit in him made him to paint using his left hand and
these beautiful paintings were also displayed to reveal the excellence.
That made me realize that constructive genius cannot be hampered
by a physical defect, as the power comes from inside to make one to
go ahead with the mission of his life. I received this powerful message
from the paintings of Zlatyu Boyadzhiev.
When we look at our civilizational heritage, it is an integrated
history of culture, peoples' way of living in various parts of the country
and the evolution of an integrated Indian society. Since I am in the
midst of a powerful creative audience I would like to share a thought
with you. This thought I got, after visiting the Ajanta and Ellora caves,
Mahabalipuram Pallava sculpture and many of our ancient temples
which have preserved the very important sculptures and paintings
without the names of the source and the date on which it was created.
The history of some of our civilizational heritage, paintings and sculpture
which are misplaced are to be recreated. I would suggest that the
Department of Culture and many art lovers can take up the mission
of creating a Heritage Cave in the hill region in the backdrop of
mountains. In this cave, 5000 years of our cultural heritage, paintings
and sculpture should be recreated with the knowledge base available
in literature and with cultural historians. It could be a mission for the
decade. All our best paintings and sculpture of today and tomorrow
must also find a place in this cave. This Heritage Cave should be the
place where the past meets the present and creates the future.
I was asking myself why theft takes place, particularly of idols,
images, paintings from our ancient temples. How can we stop this?
We need to find a solution.
In India digital library programme has made substantial progress
under the aegis of MCIT along with IISc. Many of our paintings and
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 391
sculptures, which are getting damaged, should be captured in the digital
form and preserved in multi-media. This will ensure preservation of
cultural heritage of our nation. The advancement of Nano science
has brought out a special Nano powder for restoration of old paintings
and also application for preserving the new paintings, which are made
today. This technology can be spread among our painters, sculptors
Lalit Kala Akademi can search the talents available in remote
areas of the country. They can have a special programme to attract
differently abled creative persons to participate in art competitions
for enabling them to recognize and nurture the talents through special
training programmes and creating a forum for the artists to meet elevated
minds for triggering their thoughts.
During the last 50 years Lalit Kala Akademi has done pioneering
work in recognizing and promoting native talents in multiple areas of
arts. I congratulate the Founders and the leaders who have contributed
to the growth of the Akademi in that 50 years. I would suggest that
the Akademi can have a vision of creating excellence in paintings
and sculptures with simple audio and video commentaries to attract
Once again my greetings to all members of the Lalit Kala Akademi
during the Golden Jubilee Year. My best wishes to all the members
for success in their mission.
Art Elevates the Mind
T AM INDEED delighted to participate in the Inauguration of the
1 Golden Jubilee Celebrations of the National Gallery of Modern
Art, New Delhi. My greetings to the organizers, members of Ministry
of Culture, the community of artists and art lovers, participants and
distinguished guests. I note that the National Gallery of Modern Art
represents the evolution of the changing art forms through the passage
of the last one and a half century starting from about 1857. The foremost
responsibility of the National Gallery of Modem Art is to ensure quality
of its collection and to set and maintain a standard of excellence that
pervades its activities such as development of galleries for permanent
display, organize exhibition worldwide and preserving documents of
modern art. Above all, it is essential that an exclusive area is allocated
in the Art Gallery, for the young artists to present their work to the
experienced artists and carry out research on modern art. There can
be a series of lectures and tutorials by renowned artists organized
periodically in this campus
On 16th September 2004,1 happened to visit the Robben Island,
in Atlantic Ocean, where I witnessed a sculpture synchronized with
history. The Robben Island was the place where freedom fighters
against apartheid were kept under imprisonment. I specifically went
to see the cell where Dr. Nelson Mandela was imprisoned for 26 years.
The first scene which I saw, when I entered Robben Island, was a
sculpture bringing out the pain of imprisonment and the dream for
the freedom from apartheid. Above all it reflected, not an individual
being chained but the entire people who were fighting for the freedom
were kept under confinement. This beautiful sculpture appeared to
me throughout my visit of South Africa. This symbolizes how the
fight against apartheid reached its peak and later culminated in freedom.
Speech at the Golden Jubilee Celebrations of the National Gallery of Modern Art,
New Delhi, 8 November 2004
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 393
The sculpture is indeed a masterpiece integrating multiple feelings
of imprisonment and an urge for freedom of a society. This unique
sculpture work, a bronze block image, 'THE CAPTIVE' was the creation
of Amarnath Sehgal in 1986.
Recently, I happened to study a book called "Articulations" -
Voices from the contemporary Indian visual art. I was searching in
the book about what is the unique quality of the great community of
visual art and painting? What is their medium? What is the relationship
and status of the society and the artists? Is there any connectivity
between the medium of artists like ink and brush; and the society?
While R.K. Lakshman loves painting crows for it stands out against
any background, K.K. Hebber is inspired by rhythmic movement of
lines. When M.F. Hussain says the paintings are the output of the
society, it means: if the society is a mediocre society, you will get
mediocre paintings, if the society is intellectual and prosperous, the
paintings will reflect the situation. From these Articulations, definitely
I realize that every painter and artist is a unique personality, in search
of beauty out of every event which enriches him. I tend to agree with
one of the artists, who says that the artists have to have "partnership
with the known, unknown will express itself." This takes me to an
event that took place recently.
Some time back I composed a poem in my mother tongue and
translated it into English, titled "Life Tree". The message in the poem
was celebration of life. While composing I never thought that the
poem can be given life, beauty and creativity as I visualized. That is
the time a young artist came and stayed with me in Rashtrapati Bhavan
to paint the natural beauty of Rashtrapati Bhavan and the picturesque
Mughal Gardens. He stayed with his family for two weeks and has
created beautiful canvases bubbling with full of life. I can see in the
paintings beauty of the flowers, smell the fragrance of the flowers,
and taste the honey in the flowers and speaking to me with poems.
When Manav came across my poem "Life Tree" he fell for it and he
took seven days in the beautiful environment of the Mughal garden
for transforming "Life Tree" into a speaking tree. What a beautiful
creation? First time I realized painting and poem intertwined with
the imagination of a painter which leads to the birth of a new creation.
394 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
That new creation touches your heart, smoothens your feeling and
transmits beauty and peace of the combined art into every artistic
person and showers happiness in his or her mind and soul.
Artists and scientists are heroes of the imagination or of the deep
insight into the nature of things. A painter appears to completely visualize
the picture with his imaginative skills and creativity before beginning
to paint. This I can clearly see in the case of dancers also. This is what
the painter Hebber calls as the rhythmic movement. Now I realize that
the lines are capable of singing and dancing, the paintings reveal that.
The paintings and sculptures bring out the creativity among
children. To make the education process complete it is essential to
include art as a subject in our educational curriculum. There are a
number of arts and artistic expressions hidden in our ancient village
culture which have not been brought to usage by the modem generation.
It is necessary to carry out research and bring the natural artistic
strength in different areas of the country, document them and bring
them as curriculum to the students. This is how we will be able to
hand down the civilizational heritage to our future generations. The
art gallery can request leading artists to deliver weekly inspirational
lectures in the gallery for motivating the children to develop a taste
Art has also got technology in it. When the children start learning
the art, they come to know about the usage of wood, earth, stone etc.
and how they can be carved efficiently to give beautiful expression
to the end products and preserve for generations. For example, for
providing preservative qualities to the paintings and sculpture today
one can use Nano powders. The Nano powder is used for the preservation
and restoration of paintings, which has the properties like thermal
insulation, anti-bacteria and high fade-resistance. The various
technological options in creation, preservation and promotion should
form part of the art education. Today with the digital technology being
available restoration of paintings can be done without disrupting the
usage of the art galleries. As Dr. Lochan would be aware, in the
Rashtrapati Bhavan, the Kajar painting in the Ashoka Hall was
temporarily replaced with a digital print of the original. The original
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 395
was placed back after a year duly restored. The Ashoka Hall continued
to be used during this period for the visitors without any disruption.
These phenomena can be made use of in many of the renovations
which would be needed for keeping our heritage painting alive.
The art gallery is a mirror that shows a dimension of our proud
heritage. It reflects our way of life, how our ancestors lived, what we
cherish and often what we miss. Above all art gallery brings out the
creativity of our artists for generations. The gallery reminds us how
newer technologies have influenced our life, and dimensions of newer
languages, newer expressions and newer way of life. They are reminders
of where we came from. They give us a great pleasure by satisfying
our inner urge to see what we are missing in this "modern world".
I understand that 90% of all the products that we use in our daily
life would have been invented only in the last 100 years. Those that
have been invented several centuries ago and had formed the most
cherished invention of the mankind in those days became exhibits in
When one enters the art gallery, a sense of inquisitiveness has to
be created by the environment, which will make the visitor comfortable
and feel great, enthusiastic and create a sense of pride about the Indian
culture and its past. And also the art gallery should become a window
of the best of artistic forms in the world. The exhibits must induce a
process of understanding multifaceted dimensions of human personalities,
the way in which the artist viewed his or her subject. The goodness of
the art gallery must make the visitor to linger on the thoughts. It should
ignite them and give them solace and peace in many directions. It should
flow to others as well spreading serenity, peace and uplifting the
atmosphere which will promote a feeling of divinity.
The visitor shoul d be in a position to guide himself to the specific
area of his interest, rather than being driven by the predefined path.
Present - day technology can provide solution to this issue. Each and
every gallery should be equipped with LCD displays and a multimedia
presentation - giving the salient features of that gallery, cultural impact,
historical facts behind exhibits - so that the message reaches the minds
of the people and becomes a source of inspiration. The optimum mix
396 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
of Robotics, Artificial Intelligence, Virtual Reality etc. will provide
dynamism and real time visualization.
We can even make it more interactive by customizing it in real
time for any user who is willing to pay. For example, we can give the
camera to a guide at the art gallery. The pictures will be relayed to a
viewer's home through the Internet. Looking at the picture, the viewer
will direct the Guide to go closer to some pictures or objects that he
likes to see more or ask questions which the guide will answer. We
need such innovative techniques to make our art galleries reach every
one, just in time at any place. This way we can share our cultural
values and heritage and make them an object of joy for every one.
I would like to share with you my experience after seeing the
beautiful paintings of Raja Ravi Varma in Chennai Museum. It reflects
the creativity of a genius. I can see many budding Ravi Varmas in the
face of our children; I have got thousands of paintings from young
artists, particularly from school children. Art is a great culture and it
shows the creativity, inherent talents of the individual and his capability
to visualize the scenario, nature and the future possibilities. I am just
thinking, how to provide an opportunity for budding artists to imbibe
the key characteristics of Raja Ravi Varma. Children get a unique
opportunity by participating in competitions like Shankar's International
In India digital library programme has made substantial progress
under the aegis of MCIT along with IISc. Many of our paintings and
sculptures, which are getting damaged, should be captured in the digital
form and preserved in multi-media. This will ensure preservation of
cultural heritage of our nation.
I would suggest that the National Gallery of Modern Art may
consider undertaking the following new projects as their Golden Jubilee
a. Creation of a virtual art gallery with a digital walk through
for placement in the website so that people from different
parts of the country can visit the galleries from homes or
students and get inspired from the exhibits. The website
can also provide data on all the exhibitions conducted by
National Art Gallery both national and international.
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 397
b. Create a data base of researchers who have used the National
Art Gallery for carrying out research on different topics and
the latest results of these researches.
c. Convert the summer painting workshops of National Gallery
of Modern Art to identify the young talents on different
forms of art and introduce them to a noted master of painting
so that the talent can be nurtured and allowed to blossom.
NGMA can also consider granting some scholarship for
providing financial assistance in deserving cases.
d. Undertake a project on cost effective preservation and
renovation of paintings including the application of Nano
technology as a means of preserving the future acquisitions
e. Undertake a project for the process of digitizing all the
acquisitions of NGMA progressively along with the
researched data on the art and painting. In addition the data
on the author, contemporaries of the art and the availability
of similar paintings in other similar leading institutions in
the world. This will enable bringing out a comnrehensive
document on NGMA for use by eminent artists and students.
f. Conduct periodic seminars with new technology exposure
to the young artists and also create a platform for the
international art agencies, business experts to visit and see
the inherent potential of our artists, which can pave the way
for the export of these artistic items. This should be a
I strongly believe that today's art gallery has a major role to
play and should act as a cultural window to our country. It should
provide a platform for innovation, creativity, and propagate cultural
values, and promote research and development towards enriching our
ancient technologies blended with modem techniques. It should graduate
from the custodian of ancient culture into a platform for disseminating
cultural values across the world.
I congratulate the art community on t^e occasion of the Golden
jubilee Celebrations and my best wishes to you all.
Succeeding Against Established Patterns
T AM INDEED delighted to interact with the students participating
in the Children's Science Congress organised by the Indian Science
Congress Association. My greetings to the student community and
organizers of this science congress. I am happy that this event is
integrating millions of children in the age group of 10 to 17 to interact
in a common scientific platform. The topic I have chosen for discussion
According to the laws of aerodynamics the bumble bee should
be unable to fly. Because of the size, weight, and shape of its body in
relationship to the total wing span, flying is scientifically impossible.
The bumble bee, being ignorant of scientific theory, keeps fluttering
her wings. This high frequency vibration creates a vortex which enables
it to fly. With determined efforts you can always succeed against
The world is currently dominated by subsonic cruise missiles
such as, Tomahawk, Harpoon and Exocet. However, with the advent
of modern missile defence systems involving quick reaction missiles
and lasers, the effectiveness of subsonic cruise missiles in penetrating
the enemy defences has become limited. Hence, the need for faster
missiles which can break the sound barrier. They are the supersonic
missiles. India and Russia joined together as partners to develop a
supersonic cruise missile by combining the technological capabilities
of both countries accrued over the last few decades. India's Prithvi
and Agni use advanced onboard computer and inertial navigation system.
Russia recently developed an air breathing propulsion which can thrust
the missile to supersonic speed. The scientific development of both
Speech at The Children's Science Congress at Science City, Ahmedabad,
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 399
countries therefore became handy to jointly design and develop a
new system. The result of this joint effort is BRAHMOS. BrahMos
comes from the names of two rivers, Brahmaputra of India and Moscowa
The BrahMos Missile has twin roles against sea and land-based
targets and can be fitted on multiple platforms including ships,
submarines, aircraft, mobile ground platforms and silos. The missile
has a range of 300 km with 300 kg warhead. The cruise missile used
in the Gulf War flies at a speed of 800 km/hr, like the speed of passenger
jet aircraft. It is less than the speed of sound. BrahMos flies at a speed
of more than three times the speed of jet, i.e. 3000 km/hr. Due to its
supersonic speed the missile has definite advantage of shorter flight
time to a target, before it could move away from the detected position.
The reaction time available for the enemy to intercept or take preparatory
steps to get away from the attack is drastically low. Due to the higher
velocity of the supersonic missiles, the kinetic energy imparted on
the target upon missile hit will be much higher thereby enabling higher
level of damage to the target. BrahMos has nine times kill energy (1/
2 mV2) compared to the existing cruise missile.
The BrahMos missile is the first of its kind in the world and is a
contribution of the Indian and Russian scientists. Nine flight tests
have been carried out from land and sea against ship and land targets.
All the flights are successful with repeatability in performance. This
is a remarkable achievement for the scientific community and defence
I have a suggestion to all the children and management persons
of the school. I have come across a wonderful and unique experiment
by the school children of Uttaranchal. Mind you, they are from ordinary
schools and most of them are studying in Hindi. The experiment involved
use of mapping techniques to investigate and map basic socio-economic,
environmental and ecological issues in the neighbourhood community.
Armed with the scientific and technological tools such as Global
Positioning System (GPS), Geographic Information System (GIS),
Space Imagery incorporated in the hand held computers, the children
400 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
are creating maps with the neighbourhood details to improve their
understanding of the immediate environment. These maps will enable
further the technological community to find solutions for the
regeneration of fast disappearing natural sources of water, improving
road connectivity, finding better locations for electricity and water
distribution points, reducing traffic congestion and improved systems
I suggest all of you take up this neighbourhood mapping with a
focus for next two or three years on identifying water bodies, polluted
waters, ground water sources, wells, dried water pumps, flooded areas,
small or big canals including dry ones, tanks, rivers etc. You will
develop insights about the water linkages, 1 spoke about in the early
part of my talk. Also you can identify water bodies for charging.
Then the authorities, NGOs etc. will learn from you. It is a great
Yesterday 1 read a news item where 1 find a 10 year old British
school girl saved the lives of hundreds of people during the recent Tsunami
episode on 26th December 2004 in Thailand by warning them a wall of
water was about to strike, after learning about Tsunamis in her geography
class taught by her teacher Mr. A. Kearney. She has been named 'the
angel of the beach' by the top-selling tabloid The Sun.
Tilly was spending her holidays with her family on the Thai
island of Phuket when she suddenly grasped what was taking place
and alerted her mother. While she was on the beach she noticed that
the tide was suddenly rushing out. As the other tourists watched in
amazement, the water began to bubble and the boats on the horizon
started to violently bob up and down. Tilly, who had studied tsunamis
in a geography class just two weeks earlier, quickly realised they
were in terrible danger. She told her mother they had to get off the
beach immediately and warned there could be a tsunami.
She explained she had just completed a school project on the
huge waves and said they were seeing the warning signs that a tsunami
Her parents alerted the other holidaymakers and staff at their
hotel, which was quickly evacuated. The wave crashed a few minutes
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 401
later, but no one on the beach was killed or seriously injured. Tilly,
from Surrey in England, gave the credit to her geography teacher,
Andrew Kearney, at Oxshott's Danes Hill Prep School. She told that
"Last term Mr Kearney taught us about earthquakes and how they
"I was on the beach and the water started to go funny. There
were bubbles and the tide went out all of a sudden.
"I recognised what was happening and had a feeling there was
going to be a tsunami. I told mummy." Tilly's mother said she was
"very proud" of her daughter, while her headteacher Robin Parfitt
said she had "wisdom beyond her years". Mr Kearney said he
remembered teaching Tilly and her fellow students that after the sea
was sucked backwards, the next five to 10 minutes were crucial for
people to survive. He said her quick-witted actions were typical.
Master Dhanvir Reddy and Master Chandan Prasad studying in
12th class science group of Bishop Cotton School, Bangalore have
taken up the building and launching of a rocket designed and made
by them in the school with the support of their parents, teachers and
the school. These boys were interested in rockets right from the second
class days. Both were friends since then and with common interest.
The launch of GSLV in April 2001 triggered their imagination further
and they wanted to build a rocket of their own. They carried out studies
on the rocket for about three years using the school library and internet.
Later, they prepared a design which they wanted to convert into
hardware. They made the propellant through hand mixing and casting
of dextrose and potassium nitrate in the ratio of 65:35. The diameter
of the propellant was 2.3 inches and it was 2 feet long. This was
placed in a 3 MM thick stainless steel 304 tube. The whole rocket
motor is kept in a PVC pipe of 3 inches diameter and 1.6 metre long.
The rocket is expected to go to a height of 3.8 kms and a range of 6.4
kms. Both the boys had visited the Satish Dhawan Space Centre,
Sriharikota and have given their design and all details to ISRO
authorities. They are awaiting their response for launching their rocket
from the range. I thought of sharing with you this experience which
will motivate many of you to take up such constructive hobby in
your holidays as project work.
402 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Recently, I met a group of students from South Korea accompanied
by their exchange counterparts from Delhi Public School. 1 asked
them what they understood of the Developed India mission. A small
boy from the front row belonging to Delhi Public School replied through
a small story. He said, once there was a big forest fire in a jungle. All
animals and birds and living creatures were frantically trying to escape.
However, one small bird rushed to the nearest waterhole and brought
a beak full of water and dropped on the fire. Then the fire laughed
and said what a foolish thing to do instead of escaping the wrath of
the fire. However, the bird replied, see like me if we all the birds and
animals bring in water to pour over you, the entire ocean will be here
and you will be put off in no time. Therefore, it is important for every
individual to do his bit for making India a prosperous and developed
nation. I liked the spirit of this boy and I am sure if the 540 million
youth of our country collectively work, India will be a developed
nation much before 2020.
I met a great personality who was responsible for the freedom of
South Africa. He is none other than Dr. Nelson Mandela. Particularly
for the young people, you can learn two big lessons from this personality.
They are indomitable spirit and virtue of forgiveness.
Cape Town is famous for its Table Mountain; it has got three
peaks called Table Peak, Devil Peak, and Fake Peak. Between the
peaks it was a beautiful sight throughout the day, sometimes dark
clouds and sometimes white clouds embracing the peaks. Table
Mountain is very close to the coast of the Atlantic Ocean. We travelled
by helicopter to Robben Island from Cape Town in 10 minutes. It
will take 30 minutes by powered boat to reach the Robben Island.
When we reached the Island, except sea roaring, the whole island
was silent symbolizing the thought: this is the place the freedom of
individuals was chained. We were received at the Island by Mr. Ahmed
Kathrada, a South African, who was a co-prisoner with Dr. Nelson
Mandela. What surprised me was, in a tiny room sleeping and all
human needs have to be fulfilled. It has to be remembered that
Dr. Nelson Mandela, who was 6 feet tall was imprisoned in that room
for 26 years fighting against the apartheid. The major part of his life
was spent in this silent Island. He used to be taken for quarrying in
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 403
the nearby mountain for a few hours in bright sun. This is the time
his sight got damaged. In spite of his body being tortured he revealed
to the world his indomitable spirit. This is the time he evolved a
manuscript of freedom in tiny letters every day, when the jail wardens j
went to sleep. This small tiny lettered manuscript finally became the
famous book of Mandela "A Long Walk to Freedom".
It was a great event for me to meet him in his house in
Johannesburg. I would like to share with you, when I entered Dr.
Nelson Mandela's house, I saw his three dimensional form with
cheerfulness: the mighty man who got the freedom for South Africa
from the tyranny of apartheid. And also a person when he became the
President of South Africa he gave the people freedom to move, freedom
to live in South Africa to those people who specialized in apartheid
and ill-treated and put him in the jail for 26 years. Dr. Nelson Mandela
accepted them as equal citizens. I felt that I am touching the hand of
a Mighty Soul. When he started walking he used to have a walking
stick, he discarded the walking stick; I became his support walking
stick. A big lesson that we learnt from this personality Dr. Nelson
Mandela which is explained in one of the Thirukkurals written 2200
rBOTOTiULD Qa=uj | Giffli_go
which means, for those who do ill to you, the best punishment is
to return good to them. Now I would like to administer 10 Point oath
to you. Will you repeat?
Ten point oath for enlightened citizenship:
1. I will love whatever profession I take up and I will try to
2. From now onwards I will teach at least ten persons who
cannot read and write to read and write.
I will plant ten saplings/trees and ensure their growth. 3.
404 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
4. I will go to rural and urban areas to reform at least five
persons from the habits of addiction and gambling.
5. I will take responsibility for removing the pain of ailing
6. I will participate in the mission of realizing the economic
strength of India by combining it with an education with
value system and by transforming religion into a spiritual
7. I will not support any differentiation on account of community
8. I will lead an honest life free from all corruption and will
set an example for others to adopt a transparent way of life.
9. I will always be a friend of the mentally and physically
challenged and I will work hard to make them feel normal.
10. I will celebrate the success of my country and my people.
Challenges for the World Community
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in the interaction meet with
the students, faculty and staff of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU),
New Delhi. I greet the students and congratulate the faculty and staff
members of JNU for shaping the young minds. I always cherish
interaction with the students and faculties in the school and university
environment. When I am with you, I would like to discuss with you
"The evolution of enlightened citizen-centric society".
There are many challenges in our planet earth of six billion people.
There is shortage of water, increased atmospheric pollution leading
to many diseases, depleting fossil materials and other natural resources,
depletion of available land for agriculture and lack of availability of
uniform opportunity to all citizens. Many nations are experiencing
the problems of injected terrorism. The young people of the planet
are dreaming to live in the land of opportunities and happiness. We
have also seen that the economic prosperity of a few nations alone
has not brought lasting peace to the world. No single nation will be
able to handle the situation by itself. Humanity will require mega
missions for harnessing solar energy, drinking water from sea water
through desalination process and bringing minerals from other planets
and also to bring space-manufactured products. In such a situation,
the present reasons for conflict between nation and nation will become
insignificant and unwarranted. India can play a major role in developing
a new model of enlightened citizen-centric society which will provide
prosperity, peace and happiness to all the nations in the world. Let
me discuss the model.
The evolution of enlightened human beings is indeed a big
challenge for the world community. There are three components to
Address to The Students and Faculty Members of Jawaharlal Nehru University,
New Delhi, 12 January 2005
406 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
that. The first component is education with value system, second is
religions graduating into spiritual forces to bring universal brotherhood
and the third is poverty eradication by attaining economic prosperity
through a national vision.
The best part for a person is his or her learning period in the
educational institution. The prime learning period is 5th to 17th year
of age. Hence, the curriculum period is the best time for learning, and
need the best environment and mission-oriented learning with value
based educational system. The teacher who loves teaching is an
important asset. This reminds me of the echo from Bestolozzy, a great
teacher's saying, "Give me a child for seven years, afterwards, let the
God or devil take the child, they cannot change the child." That is
indeed the power of the teacher. For parents and teachers, educational
campus and home have to have an integrated mission: education with
value system. Fifteen-year value-based education of 30,000 hours in
the educational campus is essential to establish an open and transparent
society or a society with integrity. Up to the age of 17 years, the
father, the mother and the teacher lead a child embedded with value-
The nations will target development milestones in a dynamic
environment instead of spending tremendous energy and time in
problems initiated by small aims. This is the essential environment
needed for transforming India into a developed nation.
Our nation is going through a major challenge of uplifting of
260 million people who are below the poverty line. They need habitat,
they need food, they need health care, and they need education and
employment and finally resulting in a good life. That means transforming
into a Developed Nation. Our GDP is growing at more than 6% per
annum, whereas, the economists suggest that to uplift the people below
poverty line, our economy has to grow at the rate of 10% per annum
consistently, for over a decade. How do we achieve this mission?
Integrated action: To meet the need of one billion people, we
have identified five areas where India has core competence for integrated
(1) Agriculture and food processing,
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 407
(2) Education and Health care,
(3) Reliable and Quality Electric power, Surface transport and
Infrastructure for all parts of the country,
(4) Information and Communication Technology, and
(5) Self reliance in Strategic sectors.
These five areas are closely inter-related and if well done
would lead to national food and economic security, and national security.
One of the important components of national development is PURA
(Providing Urban Amenities in Rural Areas) which will eliminate
the rural-urban divide. This model can be followed by the other nations
The Mission of PURA: The number of PURA units for the whole
country is estimated to be 7000. This envisages integrated connectivities
to bring prosperity to rural India. These are - physical connectivity
of the village clusters through quality roads and transport; electronic
connectivity through tele-communication with high bandwidth fibre
optic cables reaching the rural areas from urban cities and through
Internet kiosks; and knowledge connectivity through education,
vocational training for farmers, artisans and craftsmen and
entrepreneurship programmes. These three connectivities will lead
to economic connectivity through starting of enterprises with the help
of banks, micro credits and marketing of the products.
Each PURA cluster will connect about 20-30 villages depending
upon the region and population and will cost about Rs.100 crores.
This is a viable and sustainable business proposition. After initial
short-term employment during construction etc., we have to plan for
initiating actions for providing regular employment and self-employment
opportunities in nationally competitive small enterprises in agro
processing, manufacturing and services sectors for about 3000 people
or more. If the industrial/business parks are marketed well, they can
generate employment opportunities in support and services sector for
about 10,000 people or more. This will provide sustainable economy
for the rural sector. In this national mission, bankers can promote
entrepreneurship in the rural areas. This will lead to the removal of
408 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
urban-rural divide. It will also help to ease out the growing slums in
cities by making rural areas attractive habitats.
PURA as an Enterprise: A large number of banks have
entrepreneurial development programmes. Banks have also been funding
Small Scale Industries of different types in various regions. The small
scale industrialist is a promising candidate for becoming the chief
executive for managing the PURA complexes in an integrated way.
PURA enterprises can also undertake management of schools, health
care units, vocational training centres, chilling plants, silos and building
a market, banking system and the regional business or industrial units.
A new mission mode management style has to emerge for PURA
enterprises. It should not be looking for protective legislations to support
them. Rather they should be efficient to compete with others. This
new PURA enterprise needs partnership from the bank, from the
Government and also from the private entrepreneurs. Banks can train
the entrepreneur for managing the PURA in their training centres and
also provide them loans for creating and running PURAs as a business
proposition. I would like to give a PURA model which is in operation
at Vallam in Thanjavur.
Periyar PURA: Recently I had visited Periyar Maniammai College
of Technology for Women and inaugurated a PURA Complex. I thought
of sharing with you the developmental concept of a cluster of over 60
villages near Vallam, Thanjavur district of Tamil Nadu which involves
a population of 3 lakhs. This PURA complex has all the three
connectivities - physical, electronic and knowledge - leading to
economic connectivity. The centre of activity emanates from the women
engineering college that provides the electronic and knowledge
connectivity. Periyar PURA has health care centres, primary to post
graduate level education and vocational training centres. This has
resulted in large-scale employment generation and creation of a number
of entrepreneurs with the active support of 850 self-help groups. Two
hundred acres of waste land has been developed into a cultivable
land with innovative water management schemes such as contour ponds
and water sheds for storing and irrigating the fields. All the villagers
are busy in either cultivation, planting Jatropha, herbal and medicinal
plants, power generation using bio-mass, food processing and above
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 409
all running marketing centres. This model has emanated independent
of any government initiative. The committed leadership has been
provided by the engineering institution. This gives me the confidence
that PURA is a realizable proposition and this movement can be
multiplied by thousands of entrepreneurs, educational administrators
and philanthropic institutions with the support of the government
A message I have received is that most Indians, experienced and
old, energetic and middle-aged, young and innocent, they all look to
religion for solace and safety. I have also visited great many religious
places and houses of worship throughout the length and breadth of
this great country and I have met many of our religious leaders. The
religions are like exquisite gardens, places full of surpassing beauty
and tranquility, like sacred groves filled with beautiful birds and their
melodious songs. I truly think that religions are beautiful gardens.
They are enchanting islands, veritable oasis for the soul and the spirit.
But they are islands nevertheless. How can we connect them so that
the fragrance engulfs the whole universe? If we can connect all the
islands with love and compassion, in a garland', we will have a
prosperous India and prosperous world. Let me highlight how the
fusion of science and religion led to the transformation of religion
I would like to recall an incident which happened four decades
ago. As you all know, Prof Vikram Sarabhai is the visionary of space
programme in the country. He is well known for his cosmic ray research
area that led to evolving the space research programme for the nation.
Both Dr Homi Bhabha and Prof Vikram Sarabhai were looking for a
site to establish a space research station in the equatorial region. These
two great scientists visited a number of places. Thumba in Kerala
was selected by the scientific community for space research as it was
near the equatorial region and was ideally suited for ionospheric research
in upper atmosphere apart from study of atmospheric structure. When
Prof Vikram Sarabhai visited Thumba, the locality had series of villages
and thousands of fisher folk were living in that area. It also had a
beautiful ancient church, St Mary Magdalene Church, Pallithura and
a Bishop's House. Prof Vikram Sarabhai met many politicians and
410 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
bureaucrats to get the place for the work of space science research. It
did not move further because of the nature of the place. He was asked
to see the Bishop of Trivandrum, at that time in 1962, His Excellency
Ret Rev Dr Peter Bernard Pereira. It was a Saturday when Prof Vikram
Sarabhai met the Bishop. The Bishop smiled and asked him to meet
him the next day, i.e. Sunday. In the morning Service, the Bishop
told the congregation, "my children, I have a famous scientist with
me who wants our church and the place I live for the work of space
science research. Dear children, science seeks truth by reasoning. In
one way, science and spiritualism seek the same divine blessings for
doing good for the people. My children, can we give the God's abode
for a scientific mission?" There was a chorus of 'Amen' from the
congregation and the whole church reverberated. Subsequently, the
big event took place in 1962. His Excellency Ret Rev Dr Peter Bernard
Pereira, the Bishop of Trivandrum, took the noble decision to dedicate
the church in recognition of the national goal for the establishment of
the Indian Space Research Organisation at Pallithura, Thumba. That
was the church where we had our design centre, started rocket assembly,
design of filament winding machine for FRP product and the Bishop's
house was our scientists' place. Later, the Thumba Equatorial Rocket
Launching Station (TERLS) led to the establishment of Vikram Sarabhai
Space Centre (VSSC) and multiple space centres throughout the country.
When I think of this event, I can see how enlightened spiritual
and scientific leaders, all converge towards giving reverence to human
life. New church and new schools were established in record time.
Of course the birth of TERLS and then VSSC gave the country the
capability of design, development and produce world class huge rocket
system and subsequently, India has the capability of launching geo
synchronous, sun-synchronous and meteorology spacecraft,
communication satellite, remote sensing satellite thereby providing
fast communication, weather forecasting and also locating water
resources for the country. Today, among us, Prof Vikram Sarabhai is
not there, Rev Dr Peter Bernard Pereira is not there, but those who
are responsible for creation and make the flower and blossom will
themselves be a different kind of a flower as described in the Bhagavad
Gita: "See the flower, how generously it distributes perfume and honey.
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 411
It gives to all, gives freely of its love. When its work is done, it falls
away quietly. Try to be like the flower, unassuming despite all its
qualities." What a beautiful message for all generation of this nation,
on integration of minds and universal mind!
As you all know, the United Nations was established in 1945
after the Second World War with the mission of bringing peace among
nations and resolving conflicts as they arise so that war will not be
waged between nation and nation. What the world has witnessed today
is that two major unilateral wars have taken place in spite of the United
Nations. Hence, we need a world body which can facilitate bringing
peace, prosperity and knowledge to the nations, irrespective of the
economic status of a particular nation. Indeed the vision of the new
world body has to be facilitating the evolution of enlightened citizen
I have discussed so far the evolution of enlightened citizen with
its dimensions of education with value system, national development
and religion transforming into spirituality. Since this JNU is a place
of intellectuals with economic and societal concern, I put forth these
thoughts for your discussion. Definitely, you can get in touch with
me through my website www.presidentofindia.nic.in.
Now I would like to recall an incident, which happened during
one of my visits after becoming the President. During my tour to the
State of Bihar, among other programmes I visited various spiritual
places, Bodh Gaya, and the famous Nalanda University. I walked
through the monument and I saw a big hostel, a beautiful study hall
of Buddhist philosophy and the college where teachers and students
from nearly 63 countries used to study theology, religion and
Why it happened in this country in the 5th century AD? Our
civilizational heritage attracted students from various parts of the world.
Similarly time has come when an institution like JNU has become a
place of learning and research in attracting students from many parts
of the world. Great teachers of the university attract the best students.
JNU can have a vision of becoming a modern Nalanda.
412 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Every one of us has gone through the various phases of education
from childhood to profession. A scene appears in front of me. When
the child is empowered by the parents, at various phases of growth,
the child transforms into a responsible citizen. When the teacher is
empowered with knowledge and experience, good young human beings
with value systems take shape. When individual or a team is empowered
with technology, transformation to higher potential for achievement
is assured. When the leader of any institution empowers his or her
people, leaders are born who can change the nation in multiple areas.
When the women are empowered, society with stability gets assured.
When the political leaders of the nation empower the people through
visionary policies, the prosperity of the nation is certain. The medium
for transformation to developed India is the empowerment at various
levels with power of knowledge of the enlightened citizens.
Towards a Disease-free India
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the first Convocation of King
George's Medical University, Lucknow in the centenary year. I
congratulate all the under-graduate and post-graduate students for
their academic performance and the faculty members for shaping the
young minds. My greetings to the chancellor, vice-chancellor, faculty
members, medical experts, scientists, technologists, government
functionaries and distinguished guests. I understand that during the
last century the University has generated more than fifteen thousand
medical professionals who are playing a key role in providing quality
medicare to the needy patients in different parts of the world. The
University is now capable of imparting medical education annually
for over 300 students.
When I am in the midst of the medical community, I am reminded
of the famous statement by Norman Cousins in his book 'Anatomy
of the illness' - Patients are today reaching out to the doctor not just
for medical help. They are reaching out for kindness, assurance and
hope. I would also like to share with you a quote in the paper which
I came across on the topic 'One World, one people, one surgery' by
Dr. T.E. Udwadia which states: "The poorest of the poor have as
much right as anyone to less pain after surgery, reduced medication,
less morbidity, shorter hospitalization, and early return to home, family,
and work. Minimal access surgery and the expensive technology it
requires are advocated, not as homage or tribute to new technology,
but in appreciation of the manifold benefits this new technology gives
to our patients and our people." This thought has to be the focus of
all the graduates and post-graduates completing their medical studies
and entering into a professional career from this University. My topic
for discussion is "Towards a disease-free India."
Address at The First Convocation of King George's Medical University, Lucknow,
414 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
First I would like to discuss some of the diseases pattern visible
in certain tribal areas. I would like to share with you this information,
show that you will see the clinical data and try to find out the solution.
Recently, when I visited Chattisgarh, I was informed by various
authorities that sickle cell anaemia disease is prevalent in tribal areas
and even in the adjoining States including parts of U.P. I understand
over 25 lakh population suffer from this disease and large number of
children die every year due to complications caused by sickle cell
disease among the mothers. Life expectancy of this population is quite
low and it is reported that this disease is a silent killer. The Medical
Researchers of India have to take up this task in all earnestness.
Dr. Kmiec had shown that the new gene repair technology may
hold promise as a treatment for sickle cell anaemia and other diseases
by correcting the DNA mutation from which they arise.
Sickle cell disease is an inherited condition. Two genes for the
sickle haemoglobin must be inherited from one's parents in order to
have the disease. A person who receives a gene for sickle cell disease
from one parent and a normal gene from the other has a condition
called sickle cell trait. Sickle cell trait produces no symptoms or problems
for most people. Sickle cell disease can neither be contracted nor
passed on to another person. The severity of sickle cell disease varies
tremendously. Some people with sickle cell disease lead lives that
are nearly normal. Others are less fortunate, and can suffer from a
variety of complications. Some of the common symptoms seen in the
patients suffering from sickle cell anaemia include i) anaemia, ii)
intermittent jaundice, iii) severe joint pains, iv) recurrent infections.
These symptoms appear between the ages of four and five and severity
increases with advancement of age. The available treatment strategies
can be divided into anti-sickling agents, vasoactive drugs, bone marrow
transplantation and gene therapy. During my visit to Chattisgarh, I
found this disease prevalent in tribal areas and I would recommend
to the members of King George Medical University to apply their
mind collectively to find preventive and post-occurrence cost-effective
treatment for this dreaded disease. Since some of the graduates and
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 415
post-graduates may seek employment in rural areas I would suggest
they can take special care in treating patients having sickle cell disease.
Now, I would like to discuss multi-dimensional solutions for the
treatment of Coronary Artery Disease.
As per one of the studies, only 8% of the world population has
access to heart surgery delivery systems. Out of the 6.5 lakh surgeries
taking place in a year, 4.5 lakhs are performed in USA alone, only 2
lakhs are performed in the rest of the world. In India fifty to sixty
thousand operations are performed every year, whereas possibly 2.5
million people may need heart operations in India. Another observation
is that the occurrence of coronary artery diseases in India is taking
place between the age group of 35 and 55, whereas in the western
world, it generally occurs after 55 or 60. The main reason for this in
India is attributed to the urban life style and intake of rich food having
high cholesterol. It is also found that the occurrence of cardiovascular
cases is 4% in rural area as against the 10% found in big cities in
India, whereas the world statistics say that the incidence is only 3 to
4%. A research is essential for establishing the reasons for occurrence
of heart ailments among Indians at a young age and also the reduced
occurrence of the disease in rural areas. The results of the study will
assist in national planning for combating the heart ailment.
This also shows that the urban life and the facilities come at the
cost of deteriorated environment detrimental to one's heart and life.
The PURA - Providing Urban Amenities in Rural Areas - would
overcome this drawback and establish that the urban comforts can be
brought to the rural areas without the drawbacks associated with the
It is reported that Indians are genetically more vulnerable to heart
attacks wherever they are than Americans and Europeans. My Doctor
friends say, rheumatic heart disease, which leads to heart valve
destruction, is peculiar to the Indian community. This arises out of
poverty and poor socio-hygienic living conditions of our population,
which results in rheumatic fever in young age, leading to one in every
thousand children suffering from rheumatic heart ailments in later
416 APJ ABDUL ICALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
years. You may like to discuss this situation and possible solution in
the university. In India over hundred and fifty thousand children are
born with congenital heart diseases every year. Out of these 85% of
them have risk of life before any treatment reaches them, and
approximately 40% could be saved if timely diagnosis and proper
pre-operative preparation of the child is done. Pre-operative preparation
and the surgical intervention are time-sensitive and vary with the time
of detection of the ailment. Due to lack of timely detection, Medicare
not reaching the children leads to high rate of mortality. With the
present estimates only one per cent of the 1.5 lakh children are saved
after proper medical intervention. I would suggest the remedy for
this situation lies in screening and detection of existence of rheumatic
heart ailment in the child, right at birth, so that the parents can be
advised about the state of the child, when he or she leaves the hospital.
I was told this type of screening is presently available only in big
hospitals like AIIMS, Narayana Hrudayalaya and other few big health
care centres. I would suggest that it can become a routine medical
practice in Kings George Medical Hospital also.
The health care study 2020 has given possible diagnostic,
preventive methodology with focus on early and periodical diagnosis,
improvement in socio-hygienic conditions and better nutrition including
pre-natal nutrition. We are now witnessing treatment of coronary artery
disease moving from very invasive to less invasive methods. In the
seventies bypass surgery was the big news, in the eighties it was balloon
angioplasty and in the nineties it was the stented angioplasty.
Now, moving a step further is a totally non-invasive treatment -
External Counter Pulsation (ECP), a truly non-operative, non-
pharmaceutical, safe and effective treatment. ECP is Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) (USA) approved and finds reference in medical
and cardiology textbooks. Many articles have been published in a
number ot specialist Journals worldwide on this subject. The success
ot ECP can be judged from the fact that in USA the insurance sector
reported that the reimbursement for ECP has gone up by 6 % whereas
that ot other procedure like angioplasty, bypass surgery, etc. has come
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 417
down by 7%. Now the treatment is available in most of the leading
hospitals of the world.
In India, ECP is available at Sibia Medical Centre, Ludhiana
besides Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre, New Delhi, Peoples
General Hospital, Bhopal, Jamnagar etc.
It is well known that following bypass surgery only 75% patients
are symptom-free for 5 years or more and only 50% after 10 years or
more. The number of patients having recurrence after bypass, ballooning
and stenting is increasing and for them ECP is the only FDA approved
treatment available which is documented to increase the blood supply
to the heart by 20-42%, to the brain by 22-26% and to the kidneys by
19%. ECP also increases heart's output. More patients now prefer
non-invasive treatments. With improved cerebral circulation patients
may notice improved memory, etc. Graduates and Post-graduates from
this Institute may consider effective application of ECP as a treatment
The King George Medical University can study the various
treatments for cardiac diseases available including ECP and suggest
through a research paper the choice of treatment with reference to the
There is a need to propagate the importance of appropriate food
habit and lifestyle among the urban population to combat the situation
of increased occurrence of heart ailment. Hospitals in the country
should take proactive steps to counsel their clients in a family atmosphere
for ensuring reduction in this number in the years to come. Another
feature which has been noticed is that there is a competition, between
cardiologists and surgeons in treating heart cases. The ideal practice
should be to provide only the minimum essential treatment instead of
going in for surgical intervention as a routine management of the
It has been reported that the repeated occurrence of heart ailments
is caused by diet, smoking, lack of exercise and uncontrolled diabetes.
These factors can be controlled by an appropriate lifestyle intervention.
I have seen the change of lifestyle pattern practically taking place in
418 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Global Hospital and Research Center, Mount Abu. There was a joint
project of Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences (DIPAS),
DRDO and the Global Hospital and Research Center for studying the
effect of "holistic lifestyle intervention" on the patients suffering from
Coronary Artery Diseases during the year 1997-98. The project involved
both Control Group and the Experimental Group. The Control Group
was subjected to conventional treatment whereas the Experimental
Group was supported by an intervention involving low fat, high fibre
vegetarian diet, aerobic exercises and meditation. This three-dimensional
psycho-physiological mind-body approach in treating heart patients
of the Experimental Group resulted in dissolution of angiographic
plaque and improvement in microcirculation of blood in heart muscles
of the patients. The treatment was also supported by participation of
spouses and other family members of the patients, leading to a unique
family system approach to Medicare. These results of three dimensional
approach to counter cardiac diseases should be discussed in the medical
college lecture forum and seminars and a scientific view can be taken
In the treatment of both rhinitis and asthma treating the underlying
inflammation is crucial along with relief of symptoms. I understand
drugs like inhaled or intranasal steroids are crucial to controlling the
inflammation and disease progression. These drugs have been proved
to be safe and usage of appropriate controlled medication would prevent
long term economic costs and morbidity. One should think of both
immediate as well as long term implications of the treatment regime.
The definition of recovery in these allergic diseases varies. Can we
call the temporary relief as cure? This needs to be discussed by the
medical community. I have also seen in the pharma industry,
development of new drugs from molecules which will provide better
cure for inflammatory diseases. When the graduates enter into their
profession this information will be of use.
I have seen the website of the alumni of King George Medical
University. This can become a common platform for providing
connectivity amongst thousands of medical professionals particularly
the alumni of King George Medical University practising in different
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 419
parts of the world. The website can document the case studies and
special treatment regimes followed by different specialists and also
the novel diagnostic techniques used by them for treating many diseases.
You could also include provision for the common man to ask questions
about his specific problems connected with his disease which can be
answered by a panel of specialist doctors belonging to King George
Medical Community. This will lead to automatic generation of a database
of such patients and make treatment of these diseases available by
specialists at an affordable cost. However, the confidentiality and
anonymity of the patient has to be maintained by the website. This
website can be used for creating awareness regarding various diseases,
their symptoms and the appropriate time when the patient consults a
specialist doctor. You can also extend the services of the doctors and
the students to the rural areas of Uttar Pradesh, through tele-medicine
in a number of rural centres and mobile tele-medicine clinics to the
rural villages on a scheduled date and time periodically. This will be
a great service provided by the 15,000 alumni, staff and students of
this University to the needy. This is all the more possible in view of
the availability of EDUSAT and its connectivity for hundred thousand
locations including the rural areas. The University may request the
Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) to give them connectivity
for medical education and training.
As you all know, India is committed to 100% eradication of polio
cases by the year 2005. One of the two states controlling the happening
of this event is Uttar Pradesh. Hence, it is essential that the scientific
and medical members of King George University should work in
collaboration with the Polio eradication team of U.P. and take it as a
mission to make U.P. polio free by the year 2005.
Medical profession is a noble profession and it has always
been patient-centric. The patient has the right to have the right type
of medical care, with right type of medical practitioners. How does a
patient know, whether he should go to an ENT specialist, or an allergy
specialist or a chest specialist? He is made to go from one place to
another in search of the right specialists. An integrated mechanism is
needed to see that patient without frustration is directed to the right
420 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
specialist for right diagnosis at the right time at a right cost. The
graduates and post-graduates of this University should keep this aspect
in mind while practising this noble profession in rural and urban areas
Enriched with the knowledge provided by the King George Medical
University, I am confident that you will succeed in the mission of
removing the pain of the poor.
Womanhood - A Beautiful Creation
JT AM DELIGHTED to meet and interact with the students of Navodaya
Vidyalayas, Kendriya Vidyalayas, Lady Irwin School, Sadhu Vaswani
Mission School and Delhi Government Schools. I greet the Chairperson
and Members of National Commission for Women for organizing
My best wishes to the principals, teachers, staff, students and
distinguished guests assembled here. While talking to you, I recall a
prayer written by Mahakavi Bharathiyar, which is presented here:
^65)t_uS)65Tff)l ^ep&SjQiSfTGOITigj <9rLp6 |QLD65T
@65)l_uSl(S5r(f)l ffi^!ir QsiT6OrT0 *LpgyQL >6BT
This means: Physicists claim atoms are always on a circuitous
motion. Astronomers claim every planet and their stars are on an orbital
motion. If perpetual motion be the nature of things all around, O! My
Goddess of Learning! Kindly bless my mind also to work as vigorously
Address to the Girl Children of the Capital Organized by The National Commission
for Women, New Delhi, 17 January 2005
422 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
I think it is an important message for all of us, for continued
acquisition of knowledge and continued prosperity.
Womanhood is a beautiful creation of God. Always I am inspired
and rejuvenated by two great women. One is my mother and the other
is Bharat Ratna M. S. Subbulakshmi. For a few minutes I would like
to share my thoughts with you about these two great souls.
During the II world war in 1941, in Rameshwaram, it was a difficult
time for our family. I was a ten year old boy. War had almost reached
our doors of Rameshwaram, i.e. Sri Lanka. Almost everything was a
rarity from food articles to anything. Ours was a large joint family.
My father and his younger brother's families were all living together.
The size of our family was five sons and five daughters and three of
whom had families. I used to see in my house anytime three cradles.
My grandmother and mother were almost managing this large
contingent. The environment in the home alternated by happiness
and cry. I used to get up at four in the morning, took bath and went to
my teacher Swamiyar for learning mathematics. He will not accept
student for teaching if the student had not taken bath. He was a unique
mathematics teacher and he used to take only five students for free
tuition in a year. My mother used to get up before me, and gave bath
to me and prepared me to go for the tuition. I used to come back at
5:30 when my father would be waiting for taking me to the Namaz
and Koran Sharif learning in Arabic school. After that I used io go by
walk to Rameshwaram Road Railway station three kilometre away.
Madras Dhanushkodi mail will pass through the station but will not
stop, since it was a war time arrangement. The newspaper bundle
will be thrown from the running train.
I used to collect the paper and run around the Rameshwaram
town and be the first one to distribute the newspapers in the town.
My elder cousin brother was the agent who went away to Sri Lanka
in search of better livelihood. After distribution I used to come home
at 8 a.m. My mother will give me a simple breakfast with a special
quota compared to other children because I was studying and working
simultaneously. After the school is over in the evening, again I will
go around Rameshwaran for collection of dues from customers. One
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 423
day I still remember an incident. As a young boy since I was walking,
running and studying all together when all my brothers and sisters
were sitting and eating, my mother went on giving me chapaties (even
though we are rice eaters only wheat was rationed). When I finished
eating, my elder brother called me privately and scolded, Kalam do
you know what was happening? You went on eating chapatis and
mother went on giving you. She has given all her chapatis to you. It
is a difficult time. Be a responsible son and do not make your mother
starve. First time I had a shivering sensation and I could not control
myself. I rushed to my mother and hugged her. Even though I was
studying in 5th class, I had a special place in my home because I was
the last guy in the family. There used to be no electricity. Home was
lit by the kerosene lamp that too between 7 to 9 p.m. My mother
specially gave me a small kerosene lamp so that 1 can study up to 11
p.m. I still remember my mother in a full moon night which has been
portrayed with the title "mother" in my book "Wings of Fire".
I still remember the day when I was ten,
Sleeping on your lap to the envy of my elder brothers and sisters.
It was full moon night, my world only you knew
When at midnight, I woke with tears falling on my knee
You knew the pain of your child, My Mother.
Your caring hands, tenderly removing the pain
Your love, your care, your faith gave me strength,
To face the world without fear and with His strength.
We will meet again on the Great Judgement Day. My Mother!
This is the story of my mother who lived ninety three years, a
woman of love, a woman of kindness and above all a woman of divine
nature. My mother performed Namaz five times every day. During
Namaz, my mother always looked angelic. Every time I saw her during
Namaz I was inspired and moved.
I will now talk to you about another great mother, mother of
Carnatic music M. S. Subbulakshmi. First time in the year 1950,
424 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
I heard her when I was studying in the college at Trichy during Thiagaraja
festival at Tiruvaiyar, which is conducted in January every year. I
attended this festival with my close friend and music lover Santhanam.
After Pancharatna Kriti, M.S. Subbulakshmi sang the famous Thiagaraja
keertana "Endaro Mahaanubhavalu andhariggi vandanamulu." This
song really entered into me and blossomed happiness in my body and
soul. The meaning was so powerful; I was moved and became a lifetime
fan of M.S. I started liking her statement in the music academy, leading
"Bhakti is nothing but the devotion we show to the divinity that
resides within us. Once we regard the divinity within us with devotional
fervour, we are bound to develop the same affection towards everything
outside. The reason is that the same divine truth runs through all things.
When the devotee has attained this state, service to the world becomes
I used to meet her in music concerts. It was a great joy for me
when M.S. was honoured with Bharat Ratna in 1998 at Ashoka Hall
in Rashtrapati Bhavan. I was sitting by her side. She touched my
head and blessed. That was my greatest moment in my life. She gave
one statement which I would like to recall. "Any raga has the purpose
of directing the minds of the listeners towards God and His
manifestations." Further I have met this great soul many times when
she was not well. When she passed away on 12 December 2004, 1
was there in her house, where 1 saw a spiritual peace. My tribute to
her read as follows:
"You excelled in Sriragam,
And achieved great heights in Bhakti Sangeet
You excelled in the Kirtanas of Annamacharya,
Purandaradasa and Trinity of Carnatic music.
Even though, you may have merged with time,
Your music with beautiful deeds will live for a long time to come.
You were born in music, lived with music,
And now forever you are merged with divine music."
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 425
Now I would like to discuss my experience at Rudahi a village
in Uttar Pradesh on January 14, 2005. During the interaction, a girl,
her name is Komal Singh. She is studying in Class VIII. She asked
me: "Mr. President, you are a missile man. Is it possible to make a
missile that would promote world peace?"
My reply to this question was India has always been espousing
the cause of the greatest missile "Ahimsa Dharma". The principle of
non-violence. To prevent war we have to be strong first. Strength
respects strength. In that light, our other missiles are also required.
But our principle is "no first use". Now my thoughts go back to 2500
years in history. I see in front of me the Emperor Asoka conquering
all parts of India and walking with great pride. When he came to
Kalinga region, the great Kalinga war took place, which is now in the
present state of Orissa. The mighty army of Emperor Asoka fought
and fought and the Kalinga kings were defeated. Emperor Asoka happily
proclaimed and annexed the Kalinga country. In that great full moon
night, with the success behind him, Emperor Asoka walked in the
war ravaged battlefield. He stopped suddenly and saw the blood flowing
over hundred thousand people who were killed, and many souls crying
and moaning. That crying was engulfed in gloom. Suddenly Emperor
Asoka stopped and asked himself, "O! Almighty, what have I done?"
This spark of thought entered into the mind and soul of Emperor Asoka
and the great principle of Ahimsa Dharma was bom.
At this point of time, I would like to recall my travelling on
16 September 2004 in a train powered by steam engine in a first class
compartment of 1900's vintage organized by Durban state of South
Africa. When the train was moving from one station to another, Mahatma
Gandhi's stmggle against apartheid system in South Africa was going
through my mind. The train halted at Pietermartizburg, the station
where Gandhiji was evicted on a cold winter night from a first class
compartment and became a victim of apartheid. When I alighted at
the Pietermartizburg railway station, I saw a plaque in the railway
station, which reads like this:
426 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
In the vicinity of this plaque
M.K. GANDHI was evicted
from a first class
compartment on the night of
the course of his life.
He took up the fight
started from that date.
Later, I visited the Msunduzi Municipality where the Indian team
was given a beautiful civic reception by the Indians and South Africans.
But my thoughts were hovering on two scenes which I experienced
in South Africa. One scene was, in Robben Island where Dr. Nelson
Mandela had been imprisoned for 26 years, in a very small cell, and
the other scene was at the house of Dr. Nelson Mandela. What a moving
reception, the man at the age of 86 gave with all smiles. He had
experienced a life in prison for 26 long years and also a beautiful life
as a President of independent South Africa. When I was leaving his
house he came to the portico to give me a send off and while walking
he discarded his walking stick and I became his support. While walking
I asked him, "Dr. Mandela can you please tell me about the pioneers
of anti apartheid movement in South Africa?" He responded
spontaneously, "of course one of the great pioneers of South Africa's
freedom movement was MK Gandhi. India gave us MK Gandhi, we
gave you back Mahatma Gandhi after two decades. Mahatma Gandhi
was an apostle of Non-Violence". That is indeed the tradition of India
- to enrich whichever nation we go to, our foremost responsibility
is to enrich that nation. Enriching the nation is not only in financial
terms, but enrich with knowledge, enrich with sweat, and above all
enrich with honour and self dignity.
I would like to share with you some of my experiences which I
had during my recent visit to South Africa. I met a great personality
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 427
who was responsible for the freedom of South Africa. Particularly
for the young people, you can learn two lessons. They are: indomitable
spirit and virtue of forgiveness. He is none other than Dr. Nelson
Cape Town is famous for its Table Mountain; it has got three
peaks called Table Peak, Devil Peak, and Fake Peak. Between the
peaks it was a beautiful sight throughout the day, sometimes dark
clouds and sometimes white clouds embracing the peaks. Table
Mountain is very close to the coast of the Atlantic Ocean. We travelled
by helicopter to Robben Island from Cape Town in 10 minutes flight.
By fast powered boat it will take 30 minutes to reach the Robben
Island. When we reached the Island, except sea roaring, the whole
island was a silent place symbolizing the thought: this is the place
the freedom of individual was chained. We were received at the Island
by Mr. Ahmed Kathrada a South African, who was a co-prisoner.
What surprised me was this: can you imagine a tiny room, where
sleeping and all human needs have to be fulfilled. It has to be
remembered that Dr. Nelson Mandela, who was 6 feet tall was
imprisoned in that room for 26 years - fighting against the apartheid.
The major part of his life was spent in this silent Island. He used to
be taken for quarrying in the nearby mountain for a few hours in
bright sun. This is the time his sight got damaged. In spite of his
body being tortured, he revealed to the world the indomitable spirit
in him. This is the time he evolved a manuscript of freedom in tiny
letters every day, when the jail wardens went to sleep. This small
tiny lettered manuscript finally became the famous book of Mandela,
"A long walk to freedom".
It was a great event for me to meet him in his house in
Johannesburg. I would like to share with you, when I entered
Dr. Nelson Mandela's house, I saw his three dimensional form with
cheerfulness: the mighty man who got the freedom for South Africa
from the tyranny of apartheid. And also a person when he became the
President of South Africa he gave the people freedom to move, freedom
to live in South Africa to those people who specialized in apartheid
and ill-treated and put him in jail for 26 years. Nelson Mandela accepted
them as equal citizens who ill treated them practising apartheid. A
big lesson that we learnt from this personality Dr. Nelson Mandela
which is explained in one of the Thirukkurals, written 2200 years
428 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
which means, for those who do ill to you, the best punishment is
returning good to them.
Our nation is going through a major challenge of uplifting of
260 million people who are below the poverty line and also to give
better life for many millions who are on the border line of poverty or
just above the poverty line. They need decent habitat, they need work
with reasonable income, they need food, they need health care, and
they need education and finally a good life. Our GDP is growing at
more than 6% per annum on an average, whereas, the economists
suggest that to uplift the people from below the poverty line, our
economy has to grow at the rate of 10% per annum consistently, for
Integrated action: To meet the need of one billion people, we
have the mission of transforming India into a developed nation. We
have identified five areas where India has a core competence for
(1) Agriculture and food processing.
(2) Reliable and Quality Electric power, Surface transport and
Infrastructure for all parts of the country.
(3) Education and Healthcare.
(4) Information and Communication Technology.
These five areas are closely inter-related and if well done would
lead to national, food, and economic security.
Engines for Growth: Emphasis should be on full utilization of
natural and human resources of the nation to meet the demands of the
modern society. We should also remember that about 50% of our
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 429
population is young people with aspirations for better living. Value
addition to Agriculture, Manufacturing and Service sectors, building
the national core competence and technologies will lead to additional
high income employment potential. The engines for growth will be
accelerated by launching of the five national missions, viz. water,
energy, education and skills, infrastructure and employment generation
that will enable achievement of 10% GDP growth rate per annum. It
is possible to do so with ecological and economic sustainability.
With these aspects, we have already laid down the road map.
The priority for the government is to convert the road map into various
missions. While converting the vision into different missions we seem
to have many thoughts and variety of routes to reach the goal. This is
where there is a need to have a coherent thinking among all the members
of the society. All of them need to think that the nation is greater than
an individual or an organization. There is a mindset among many
that "we cannot do it". However in my experience with many institutions
in the country and the observations of the results of some of them in
the mission mode projects, I can assure you whenever we have decided
to achieve certain goals with clear targets, we have always achieved
it. I have seen this even in private and public sector industries - if
they decide to take up tasks as a mission, they succeed. Let me discuss
the evolution of knowledge society with you.
Knowledge has always been the prime mover for prosperity. A
knowledge society is one of the basic foundations for the development
of any nation. Knowledge has many forms and it is availabl e at many
places. The acquisition of knowledge has therefore been the thrust
area throughout the world and sharing the experience of knowledge
is a unique culture of our country. During the last few centuries the
world has undergone a change and in the 21st century, a new society
is emerging where knowledge is the primary production resource instead
of capital and labour. Efficient utilisation of existing knowledge can
create comprehensive wealth for the nation in the form of better health,
education, infrastructure etc. for improving the quality of life. Whether
a nation has emerged as a knowledge society or not is judged by the
way the country effectively deals with knowledge creation and
430 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
The developing countries always have a mindset to follow step-
by-step the footsteps of the developed countries, in the developmental
process. This I call a beaten track. The reason is, there are multiple
societies in every nation starting from agricultural society, industrial
society, and information society leading to the knowledge society in
the 21st century. These societies underwent a transformation from
the agricultural society, where manual labour was the critical factor,
to the industrial society, where the management of technology, capital,
and labour provided the competitive advantage. The information era
in the last decade saw networking within the country and with the
other nations and the software products drove the economies. Some
of the nations including India used this opportunity well and could
demonstrate its core competence in IT. The entry to knowledge society
has given India a great opportunity to bring back the glory of our
Efficient utilization of existing knowledge can create a
comprehensive wealth for the nation and also improve the quality of
life, in the form of better health, education, infrastructure, and other
societal needs. The ability to create and maintain a knowledge society
infrastructure, develop the knowledge workers, and enhance their
productivity through the creation, growth, and exploitation of new
knowledge, will be the key factor in deciding the prosperity of this
knowledge society. Whether or not a nation has developed into a
knowledge society is judged by the way it creates and deploys knowledge
in the sectors like ICT, Manufacturing, Agriculture, and Health care
and so on in order to create wealth for the society, business and the
people. Knowledge and wealth creation have to go hand in hand in a
Recently, I read a news item where I find a 10 year old British
school girl saved the lives of hundreds of people during the recent
Tsunami episode on 26th December 2004 in Thailand by warning
them a wall of water was about to strike, after learning about Tsunamis
in her geography class taught by her teacher Mr. A. Kearney. She has
been named "the angel of the beach" by the top-selling tabloid, "The
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 431
Tilly was spending her holidays with her family on the Thai
island of Phuket when she suddenly grasped what was taking place
and alerted her mother. While she was on the beach she noticed that
the tide was suddenly rushing out. As the other tourists watched in
amazement, the water began to bubble and the boats on the horizon
started to violently bob up and down. Tilly, who had studied tsunamis
in a geography class just two weeks earlier, quickly realised they
were in terrible danger. She told her mother they had to get off the
beach immediately and warned there could be a tsunami. She explained
she had just completed a school project on the huge waves and said
they were seeing the warning signs that a tsunami was minutes away.
Her parents alerted the other holidaymakers and staff at their
hotel, which was quickly evacuated. The wave crashed a few minutes
later, but no one on the beach was killed or seriously injured. Tilly,
from Surrey in England, gave the credit to her geography teacher,
Andrew Kearney, at Oxshott's Danes Hill Prep School. She told that
last term Mr Kearney taught about earthquakes and how they can
"I was on the beach and the water started to go funny. There
were bubbles and the tide went out all of a sudden.
"I recognized what was happening and had a feeling there was
going to be a tsunami. I told mummy." Tilly's mother said she was
"very proud" of her daughter, while her headteacher Robin Parfitt
said she had "wisdom beyond her years". Mr Kearney said he
remembered teaching Tilly and her fellow students that after the sea
was sucked backwards, the next five to 10 minutes were crucial for
people to survive. He said her quick-witted actions were typical.
When the child is empowered by the parents, at various phases
of growth, the child transforms into a responsible citizen. When the
teacher is empowered with knowledge and experience, good young
human beings with value systems take shape. When individual or a
team is empowered with technology, transformation to higher potential
for achievement is assured. When the leader of any institution empowers
his or her people, leaders are bom who can change the nation in multiple
432 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
areas. When the women are empowered, society with stability gets
assured. When the political leaders of the nation empower the people
through visionary policies, the prosperity of the nation is certain.
While concluding I would suggest that the students assembled
here choose and fix an aim in life. Let that become the mission of
your life. Work hard for your goal with patience and perseverance.
While you are working for your goal there are bound to be hurdles
and problems. You do not allow problems to become your master.
You become master of the situation and defeat the problem. This is
the secret of success in all your missions. Now I would like to administer
the ten point oath to all of you. Will you all repeat?
Ten-point oath for enlightened citizenship:
1. I will love whatever profession I take up and I will try to
2. From now onwards I will teach at least ten persons who
cannot read and write to read and write.
3. I will plant ten saplings/trees and ensure their growth.
4. I will go to rural and urban areas to reform at least five
persons from the habits of addiction and gambling.
5. I will take responsibility for removing the pain of ailing
6. I will participate in the mission of realizing the economic
strength of India by combining it with an education with
value system and by transforming religion into a spiritual
7. I will not support any differentiation on account of community
8. 1 will lead an honest life free from all corruption and will
set an example for others to adopt a transparent way of life.
9. I will always be a friend of the mentally and physically
challenged and I will work hard to make them feel normal.
10. I will celebrate the success of my country and my people.
Ingredients of Knowledge Society
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in the 16th Convocation of
the Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU). I greet the
Vice-Chancellor, Pro-chancellor, Directors of schools, professors,
teachers and staff for their contribution in shaping young minds to
contribute to the nation in multiple fields. I take this opportunity to
congratulate the University students for their academic performance.
The universities have a major responsibility in nation building through
imparting education to all those who aspire to learn more by providing
distance education opportunity to students in remote areas in multiple
disciplines. In addition, there are many students who interrupt their
studies to earn for their family. They have a desire to improve themselves
and also there are knowledge seekers. Distance education provides
them such an opportunity . Thus Distance Education has a large socio
economic relevance. I am happy to note that this University has
contributed substantially in the development of higher education in
the country and have over 1.3 million students on their roll at
present. This University has contributed to the cause of spreading
education for the last one and half decades. I was thinking what
thoughts I could share with the enlightened members of this distance
learning centre. I have selected the topic "How to add value to distance
During the last century, the world has undergone a change from
agricultural society, where manual labour was the critical factor, to
industrial society where the management of technology, capital and
labour provided the competitive advantage. Then the information era
was born in the last decade, where connectivity and software products
are driving the economy of a few nations. In the 21st century, a new
society is emerging where knowledge is the primary production resource
instead of capital and labour. The knowledge society is powered by
Speech at the 16th Convocation of Indira Gandhi National Open University, New
Delhi, 5 March 2005
434 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
innovation capacity. Efficient utilisation of this existing knowledge
can create comprehensive wealth of the nation and also improve the
quality of life - in the form of better health, education, infrastructure
and other social indicators. Ability to create and maintain the knowledge
infrastructure, develop knowledge workers and enhance their
productivity through creation, growth and exploitation of new
knowledge will be the key factors in deciding the prosperity of this
knowledge society. Whether a nation has arrived at a stage of knowledge
society is judged by the way the country effectively deals with
knowledge creation and knowledge deployment in all sectors like IT,
industries, agriculture, health care etc.,
IGNOU has a major role to play in this transformation process
of our society into a knowledge society through their value added
distance education system. There has been considerable effort to apply
technology for improving the delivery of distance education system
over the years. With the availability of an exclusive education satellite
(EDUSAT), the time is ripe for making intense use of ICT to create
interactive virtual class rooms in all our remote areas. There are also
a number of State and Central Universities which provide distance
education. I believe they should share their experiences, teaching
materials etc. to maximize the benefits for all the students. Now I
would like to discuss the ingredients of Knowledge Society.
Knowledge is converted into wealth for social good through the
process of innovation. Innovation is an important factor for the
competitiveness of both service and manufacturing sectors. Innovation
tends to emanate less from R&D and more from other sources including
organizational change. Hence there is an urgent need to establish an
innovation system in the country. Such a system would involve creation
of clusters, which are networks. This network can include inter
dependent firms, knowledge producing institutions/ universities,
colleges/institutes, research institutes, technology providing firms/
bridging institutions, (for example think tanks, providers of technical
and consultancy services) and customers linked in a value addition
creating production chain. The concept of clusters goes beyond that
of a firm network, as it captures all forms of knowledge sharing and
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 435
exchange. Thus, an innovative system with its clusters would tap into
the growing stock of global knowledge, assimilate and adopt it to
local needs and finally create new knowledge and technology. IGNOU
should propagate the new knowledge among the 1.3 million students
spread in different parts of the country and abroad. This will be the
greatest contribution IGNOU will be making to provide value added
education to the youth of the nation who are the vital resource for
transforming India into a developed nation by 2020.
I understand that IGNOU has taken a number of steps to apply
ICT for providing value added services to the distance education
students. Your efforts in launching the Gyan darshan, Gyan vani, Tele
conferencing, interactive radio counselling, and students support services
network are indeed a progressive step towards the distance and wider
outreach of the education programmes. I understand that IGNOU is
working with EDUSAT programme to create hundred point to point
interactive terminals soon. Since you are in this mission, I would like
to share my experience with a universal tele-education system
implemented in Rashtrapati Bhavan.
A three-pronged approach is essential to make distance education
programme viable and a successful proposition through the universal
tele-education system to all remote parts of the country. Since the
EDUSAT is providing the connectivity the other two essential
components which are vital for the success of the programme are
Tele-Education System and the Quality Content Generation and
I would like to narrate my experience in the development of a
Tele-education delivery system. I had a dream; a good mathematics
teacher teaching mathematics in a remote village like Chandipur in
Orissa, should be able to teach a number of schools located in different
parts of the country including Konkan villages in Maharashtra, interact
with the students in sequence and be able to clarify the doubts. Also
the teacher must be able to draw the knowledge from various sources,
such as internet, digital library, generated creative content and the
lectures given by various experts in the same field and deliver to all
the students as if they are in the same simulated class room in a cost-
436 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
effective manner. Such a system has been implemented in Rashtrapati
This universal tele-education delivery system works via
heterogeneous network platform through IP protocol. It provides virtual
classrooms in a multi class and studio environment with seamless
two-way interaction between the teachers and students in a collaborative
framework. It provides seamless, one-to-one, one-to-many connectivity,
through the broadcasting network in a multicasting mode of delivery.
It seamlessly enables a remote teacher to become a teacher to all the
students in a session. Unlike the other video conferencing systems
and multimedia tools currently in use for tele-education purposes,
this Interactive Universal Tele-education delivery system creates a
virtual classroom. It enables the teacher to take the student to a live
virtual tour of the subject. This provides a cost-effective solution for
interactive content delivery. On a comparative basis we can create
250 nodes tele-education system for interactive delivery at a cost of
establishing 4 multi-station video conferencing systems.
Recently, I addressed five colleges in different parts of Punjab
as a part of Distance Education Programme. I referred in my classroom
the subject that I was teaching, relevant Digital Library reference, a
page from book reference and my talk delivered during an international
conference on e-governance through my website. I could see all the
class students from various locations. They can also see me and interact
with me. Such an interactive tele-education delivery system is fully
functional. This integrated solution will enable IGNOU to realize a
cost-effective virtual dynamic classroom. IGNOU may like to study
the system and make use of it for realizing the goals of the university
to become a world class institution in distance education. This is
particularly important in view of IGNOU imparting education in many
foreign countries and having to compete with multinational universities.
I understand that the universities abroad have already adopted such
systems and the students are enriched through quality education imparted
through the innovative use of ICT.
I will be very happy to take three classes relevant to the courses
conducted by IGNOU as part of Distance Education Programme. These
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 437
lectures will be available to all the centres connected to IGNOU and
they should interact with me live and have the facility to ask questions
to which I can respond. Rashtrapati Bhavan will assist you in setting
up the tele-education delivery system in the hundred interactive terminals
for this programme. 1 am sure that this should be possible within the
next three to four months' time. Now 1 would like to discuss the next
important aspect in Distance Education, content generation, in which
you have core competence and large library of multi-media content.
There are three components for education: lectures, practical or
laboratory and library. The content includes all the above three. Content
can be generated in many ways. The first one is the assimilation of
the subject by an expert teacher through research study of many books
and articles leading to the generation of quality and creative content
in a presentable format. The teacher presents in a unique and innovative
way to make the content appealing and easily understandable to the
students. The second form of content could be on a self-learning method
by breaking down the content into a series of question-answer models.
Third may be from various books, which can be extracted through a
digital library and presented just in time to all the remote students.
Fourth may be from Internet, where wealth of information is available.
Teacher may search the information in the Internet and push the content
live through the tele-education system.
The content should have supportive animations, which may even
bring virtual laboratories and virtual immersion effects to the remote
students. When the content is generated, it should be a sharable learning
object across the nation and across all platforms. I understand that
IGNOU has already developed substantial amount of content during
the last one and a half decades. The content can also be further improved
by making use of the student's creative and innovative thoughts under
the guidance of the expert teachers as a group activity as well as by
sharing experiences with other DE programmes of other universities
as I have suggested earlier.
As an example, my lectures delivered during various functions
are dynamically updated in our website. During the address many
participants ask questions on several topics. The answers to these
438 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
questions are also placed in the website as supplementary information.
Similarly, the teachers after delivering the talk will also be asked a
number of questions by the students. The proceedings of the questions
and answers session can be added to the content document for enriching
it. Now I would like to discuss how the Indira Gandhi National Open
University can become a virtual university for promoting value added
quality education to different parts of the country and abroad.
It is time that we should start looking at the possibility of converting
IGNOU as a Virtual University in India through networking of the
resources of different institutions based on their core competence.
This Virtual University can have the following tasks:
(a) Act as a central hub of all the resource centres of different
(b) Identify experts of national/international eminence in
specialized areas and nominate institutions of eminence.
(c) Co-ordinate, organize, schedule and broadcast the lectures
of specialists at a mutually convenient time to all participants.
(d) Record the live transmission of the lecture with interaction
details in a data bank for easy access by participants for
(e) Digitize all the university libraries and make them available
for seamless access by all the universities.
(f) The whole distance education programme need to become
This experiment across the country will provide a common platform
for teaching in colleges, universities and even vocational courses.
This will give equal emphasis on theory and experiments in spite of
the fact that it will be done in the cyberspace. Such is the power of
the technology and our understanding of it. This facility would also
help in expansion of telecommunication and IT services. All this would
lead to value addition to the distance education programme through
the synergy of multiple institutions. Now I would like to discuss the
role of faculty members in capacity building among our youth.
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 439
Many of our faculty members have successfully groomed young
innovators who can innovate and create innovative organisations, which
are relevant to the society.
The success of your students is a testimony to your great service.
I am sure that each one of you would create many innovators in the
field of science, engineering, management, agriculture, law, information
technology and other disciplines taught by this University.
For participating in the nation building tasks, the capacities required
to be built among the students by the faculty members are: the capacity
for research and inquiry, the capacity for creativity and innovation,
particularly the creative transfer of knowledge, the capacity to use
high technology, the capacity for entrepreneurial leadership and the
capacity for Moral Leadership.
The aim of the faculty members should be to build character and
human values, enhance the learning capacity of the students through
technology and build the confidence among them to be innovative
and creative which in turn will enable them to contribute towards
making their organisations competitive in the global environment.
As you may be aware India has a mission of digitizing million
books through a digital library programme. This has been initiated
based on a proposal by Prof. Raj Reddy of Carnegie Mellon University
(CMU), Pittsburgh and Prof. N. Balakrishnan of IISc, Bangalore. Prof.
Raj Reddy, an NR1 has taken a special initiative of creating this
programme in India, his motherland for improving the educational
system in the country. This has been his passion for many years. This
programme is progressing well and we have already digitized 90,000
books out of which 50,000 are already on the web http://
www.dli.ernet.in. Many of the books are in Indian languages. This
Digital Library of India Initiative had also become test bed for many
Indian Language Technology Researches including the development
of Machine Translation Systems, OCRs, Summarizers and so on in
Indian languages. More than 21 centres spanning academic institutions,
social organizations and Government agencies including the Rashtrapati
Bhavan have partnered in creating this huge repository of knowledge.
440 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
This programme is fully supported by the Ministry of Communication
and Information Technology. IGNOU can utilize the facilities of the
digital library initiative and digitize all the course material available
with them for different disciplines. This will enable the university to
offer a large number of e-learning courses and design web-based
Since IGNOU is working on Education programme for differently
abled students, I would like to mention an experience relating to the
provision of a special learning facility to the Visually Challenged
students based on the discussions I had with Mr. Deependra Manocha
who wrote to me a few months back about his inability to read my
speeches in the website. Later, I met Mr. Asif Iqbal, who told that he
was using the computer for his studies, exams, presentations and
communications. For this he was using a third party software which
is costly and beyond the reach of an ordinary person. This motivated
me to think of getting software developed, which can become a versatile,
low cost tool for all trainers and self help learning system for visually
challenged persons through web.
Based on this thought, a Speech Applet "Virtual Vision" has
been designed at Rashtrapati Rhavan. The main objectives were that
it should be a versatile took have a voice enabled interface, configurable
with any web server, provide an audio output of any web content on
mouse-over and mouse click. It should be available to access through
web, and be easy to deploy the course designed for visually challenged
persons in an intranet and internet environment. The team has developed
and produced a Speech Applet "Virtual Vision" having these
characteristics within a period of seven weeks. It can be operated
using a keyboard for its activation and deactivation of speech, which
makes them feel interactive. The speech applet can be configured to
an e-learning system, wherein the courses and training materials for
the visually challenged persons can be deployed and they can learn
with ease through this tool. IGNOU may like to study this applet and
incorporate it as a part of the learning programme for visually challenged
students. Now I would like to discuss about the need for innovation
in the education system for preparing our youth to face global
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 441
Since a large number of students have qualified from IGNOU
during the last one and a half decades, I would recommend mobilizing
of this vital resource for the development of the University which
can be done through the establishment of a special portal.
The 470,000 alumni who have passed out from IGNOU during
this period are presently working in different organisations. IGNOU
should have a continuing education portal which provide educational
services from its alumni, from the industry, from the academia to
enlighten and enable the faculty and students with the real time
experiences. Portal will act an interface between the alumni and the
current students. They can share their experiences, they can discuss
among themselves, they can give suggestion for teaching improvements,
course contents, dynamic upgradation of the syllabus based on world
wide developments, creation of employment opportunities and
adaptation of technology application for improving the learning methods.
IGNOU should find a method to attract the alumni to contribute for
this portal and also organize yearly events to bring the alumni and
the learners together for mutual benefit.
Ultimately, education in its real sense is the pursuit of truth and
empowering ourselves to contribute to the society. It is an endless
journey through knowledge and enlightenment and learning new skills
for better life for all. Such a journey opens up new vistas of development
of humanism where there is neither scope nor room for pettiness,
disharmony, jealousy, hatred or enmity. It transforms a human being
into a wholesome whole, a noble soul and an asset to the universe.
Universal brotherhood in its true sense becomes the sheet anchor for
such education. Real education enhances the dignity of a human being
and increases his or her self-respect. If only the real sense of education
could be realized by each individual, and carried forward in every
field of human activity the world will be so much a better place to
There is a need for IGNOU to have a mission to promote value-
based quality education among the youth of the nation which is the
foundation to ensure the creation of enlightened citizens who will
make a prosperous, happy and strong nation.
Creativity adds beauty to Human Life
J AM DELIGHTED to address and interact with the students of
schools and colleges of Port Blair. My greetings to the Principals,
teachers and students of this beautiful island. I would like to discuss
the topic "Creativity adds beauty to Human Life".
I was thinking about creativity.
1. How it is created?
2. What is the source?
3. Is it genetic? Or
4. By learning, can it be created?
Dear children, can you tell me three important events which
happened during the last two centuries that changed the human life in
this planet? Any one of you?
Charles Darwin, who propounded the theory of "Natural Selection".
He made us think differently about how the evolution of human being
took place. Thomas Alva Edison, who invented electricity, which
has indeed revolutionized every field of science and technology and
human life. Electricity is indeed the foundation for the growth of
human life today. Mahatma Gandhi, whose Ahimsa Dharma movement
against racial discrimination in South Africa and against British rule
in India through non-violence. These three events of 20th century
are the results of creative mind.
Look at the sky. We are not alone. The whole universe is friendly
to us and conspires only to give the best to those who dream and
work. Like, Sir C. V. Raman looked at the sea and the sky, and questioned
Address and Interaction with School and College Students at JNRM Auditorium,
Port Blair, 5th May 2005
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 443
why the sea should be blue? This led to the birth of Raman Effect, he
found the blue of the sea was due to the molecular scattering of light
and was not a case of reflection of the sky in water as most people
One of the major breakthroughs in science in the 20th century
that had an everlasting impact on the human kind is the most celebrated
work of Einstein. Einstein explained, for the first time in 1905, the
principle of the inertia of energy as a universal law. The famous
energy equation E=MC2 was given to the world. This equation has
become the basis for converting matter into energy - giving birth to a
new avenue called the nuclear energy for producing electricity to light
up our cities and villages.
After this event, Einstein looked up at the space and saw millions
and millions of galaxies and he noticed that we belong to one of the
smallest galaxies. In the smallest galaxy, sun is the smallest star. In
this smallest galaxy, we have nine planets and the planet in which the
human race lives is an insignificant planet. But yet we have all types
of lives, including human life. This led to creative astronomers like
Copernicus, Galileo and Kepler who had given a new dimension to
the world of astronomy. Today we take it for granted that earth is a
globe, orbiting around the sun, and the sun orbits in the Milky Way.
We are not alone. Human race is not a unique race in the universe.
All the technological advancements we have today are the outcome
of scientific exploration of scientists of earlier centuries. At no time,
man was beaten by problems. He strives continuously to subjugate
impossibility and then succeeds.
(According to the laws of aerodynamics) the bumblebee should
be unable to fly. Because of the size, weight, and shape of its body in
relationship to the total wing span, flying is scientifically impossible.
The bumblebee, being ignorant of scientific theory, goes ahead and
444 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Human flight is nothing but creativity of human mind and it
undergoes several struggles to achieve excellence. In 1890, a well-
known scientist Lord Kelvin, who was the President of Royal Society
of London said, "any thing heavier than air cannot fly, and cannot be
flown." Within two decades Wright Brothers proved man could fly
of course at heavy risk and cost.
On the successful completion of Moon Mission in 1969, von
Braun, a very famous rocket designer, who built Saturn-V to launch
the capsule with astronauts and made moon walk a reality, in 1975
said "If I am authorized, I will remove the word impossible".
In ancient days, Ptolemaic astronomy is a widely used system
in calculating the dynamics of various stars and planets. Assumption
by then was that the earth was flat. What scientific struggle had to
take place to prove that the earth is spherical in shape orbiting around
Now I would like to talk to you about the evolution of enriched
We have multiple societies in every nation starting from agricultural
society, industrial society, and information society leading to knowledge
society. During the 20th century, societies underwent a change from
the agricultural society, where manual labour was the critical factor,
to the industrial society, where the management of technology, capital,
and labour provided the competitive advantage. The information era
was born in the last decade. Networking within the country and with
the other nations and the software products drove the economies. Some
of the nations including India utilized this opportunity. In this decade
we are just entering into knowledge society era.
The uniqueness of knowledge society is enriching the information
society with innovation and value addition of products. The knowledge
also enables value addition to the other three societies. In knowledge
society, knowledge is the primary production resource instead of capital
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 445
or labour. I would like to discuss with you how we can work together
to make our societies enriched by knowledge and transform them
Knowledge can create a comprehensive wealth for the nation
and also improve the quality of life, in the form of better health,
education, infrastructure, and other societal needs. The ability to create
and maintain a knowledge society infrastructure, develop the knowledge
workers, and enhance their productivity through the creation, growth,
and utilization of new knowledge, will be the key factor in deciding
the prosperity of this knowledge society. Whether or not a nation has
developed into a knowledge society is judged by the way it creates
and deploys knowledge in the sectors like ICT, manufacturing,
agriculture, services, education and health care.
The whole purpose of education in a country like India is to
develop and enhance the potential of our human resource and
progressively transform it into a knowledge society. The knowledge
society will be a society producing products and services that are
rich in both explicit and tacit knowledge, thus creating value added
products. The real capital of this knowledge society will be its knowledge
workers. The society will be highly networked to create knowledge-
intensive environment along with enabling process to efficiently create,
share, use and protect knowledge. Our education system should re
align itself at the earliest and promote creativity and innovation among
youth and equip them with skills to participate in the societal
transformation, since these characteristics will be needed in producing,
finding innovative applications and marketing in a competitive
For success in any mission what we need is indomitable
spirit. Let us study the characteristics of indomitable spirit. It
has two components. The first component is that there must be a
vision leading to higher goals of achievement. I would like to recall
a couplet from Thirukkural by the Poet Saint Thiruvalluvar written
446 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Q<oU6tT6TT j <9)6ff)OTlLI LD 0 ft j ) lL L_ UD LD U rf) rT LD
It means that whatever may be the depth of the river or lake or
pond, whatever may be the condition of the water, the lily flower
always comes out and blossoms. Similarly, if there is a definite
determination to achieve a goal even if it is impossible to achieve,
Many of us have gone through large programmes and projects.
We would have experienced that success is not in sight and there are
many hurdles. The same poet reminds us at this point of time through
( }(pLhmu& S@\hmu u@uuff
We should never be defeated by any problems. We should become
master of the situation and defeat the problems. I consider these two
Thirukkurals characterize the indomitable spirit.
Ten-point oath for enlightened citizenship:
1. I will love whatever profession I take up and I will try to
2. From now onwards I will teach at least ten persons who
cannot read and write to read and write.
3. I will plant ten saplings/trees and ensure their growth.
4. I will go to rural and urban areas to reform at least five
persons from the habits of addiction and gambling.
5. I will take responsibility for removing the pain of ailing
6. I will participate in the mission of realizing the economic
strength of India by combining it with an education with
value system and by transforming religion into a spiritual
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 447
7. I will not support any differentiation on account of community
8. 1 will lead an honest life free from all corruption and
will set an example for others to adopt a transparent way
9. I will always be a friend of the mentally and
physically challenged and 1 will work hard to make them
10. I will celebrate the success of my country and my people.
Education with Value System
J AM HAPPY to participate in the 175th year celebrations of Scottish
Church Collegiate School, Kolkata. My respects to Rev Dr. Alexander
Duff and the Great Rajaram Mohan Roy who were responsible for
forming the nucleus of the Scottish Church School with five boys in
the year 1830. This institution had a pioneering role in imparting
knowledge to the people of Bengal since the dawn of 19th century. I
am delighted to know that this collegiate school has produced many
distinguished personalities who are contributing in different disciplines
in India and abroad. My greetings to all of you. I would like to
discuss with all of you the topic "Creativity in Teaching".
Where are we now? We have assembled here for participating
in the 175th year celebration of Scottish Church Collegiate School.
Kolkata is a small dot on the earth. Earth is a representative of the
solar system. Earth constantly rotates around the Sun.
Earth while orbiting around the Sun keeps on rotating around its
own axis. While doing so, how much time the earth takes to complete
one rotation. One of you please answer. Earth takes twenty-four hours
for completing one rotation on its own axis. This is how night and
day are created. Apart from that what does earth do? Earth also
orbits around the sun. How much time does it take for this orbital
motion? 365 days, i.e. one year.
Your Scottish Church Collegiate school has orbited around the
sun hundred and seventy-five times. This is the importance of hundred
and seventy-five years. Let me pray to the almighty to provide
continuous growth and prosperity in education to Scottish Church
Collegiate School for many thousands of years.
Address at the 175th year Celebration of Scottish Church Collegiate School, Kolkata,
3 3th July 2005
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 449
When the students join the schools, it is important for the
institutions to see what they should be remembered for? If the institution
can develop enlightened citizens and moral leaders through value-
based education then the institution will be remembered forever. The
institution should create necessary environment to enable the students
to transform into enlightened citizens.
National development is a collective process and has to be
accomplished through the constructive efforts of enlightened citizens.
The evolution of enlightened human beings is indeed a big challenge
for the world community. I was asking myself, what will be the
components of such a mission? There are three components to that.
The first component is education with value system, second is religions
graduating into spiritual forces to bring universal brotherhood, and
the third is poverty eradication by attaining economic prosperity through
The best part of a young person is his or her childhood in school
and the best time spent is 0800 hrs to 1600 hrs in the school. The
prime learning environment is 5th to 16th years of age. The student
spends approximately 25,000 hours in the school campus. Of course,
at home, love and affection are imparted but again most of the time
of the day is spent in preparing school's homework and study, eat,
play and sleep. Hence the school hours for children are the best time
for learning and need the best of environment, mission-oriented learning
with value system. I still hear the echo from Bestolozzy, a great teacher's
saying, "give me a child for seven years. Afterwards, let the God or
devil take the child. They cannot change the child." That is the great
confidence of the teacher. What a golden mission a school can have!
All the more, the teachers are in the centre of the mission. We need
hundreds and thousands and lakhs of committed teachers, who can
shape the minds of our youth. Technology can also play a part to
propagate good teaching through tele-education. The best of dynamic
triangle is child, teacher and parents. For parents and teachers, school
campus and home have to have an integrated mission: education with
value system. If the child misses the value-based education in the
school, no government or society can establish a transparent society
or a society with integrity.
450 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
The nations will target development milestones in a spirited
environment instead of spending tremendous energy and time in
problems initiated by small aims. This is the essential environment
need for transforming India into a developed nation.
A message I have received is that most Indians, experienced and
old, energetic and middle-aged, young and innocent, they all look to
religion for solace and safety. I have also visited great many religious
places and houses of worship throughout the length and breadth of
this great country and I have met many of our religious leaders. The
religions are like exquisite gardens, places full of surpassing beauty
and tranquility, like sacred groves filled with beautiful birds and their
melodious songs. I truly think that religions are beautiful gardens.
They are enchanting islands, veritable oasis for the soul and the spirit.
But they are islands nevertheless. How can we connect them so that
the fragrance engulfs the whole universe? If we can connect all the
islands with love and compassion, in a 'garland', we will have a
prosperous India and prosperous world.
Now I would like to discuss what is needed at this juncture. Nearly
700 million people of India live in the rural areas in 600,000 villages.
Rural prosperity depends upon building up both "content" and
"connectivity" simultaneously. Connectivity of village complexes
providing economic opportunities to all segments of people is an urgent
need to empower the rural sector. The essential needs of the villages
today are water, power, road, sanitation, health care, education,
communication and other services needed for sustainable
entrepreneurship and quality of life. For achieving this we need to
establish 7000 PURA (Providing Urban Amenities in Rural Areas)
clusters across the country, which will be a major source of rural
enterprise development and employment generator.
The integrated methods, which will bring prosperity to rural India
are: the physical connectivity of the village clusters through quality
roads and transport; electronic connectivity through tele-communication
with high bandwidth fibre optic cables reaching the rural areas from
urban cities and through internet kiosks; knowledge connectivity through
education, vocational training for farmers, artisans and craftsmen and
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 451
entrepreneurship programmes; these three connectivities will lead to
economic connectivity through starting of enterprises with the help
of banks, educational institutions, micro credits and marketing the
My visualization of that competitive Developed India profile by
2020 is as follows:
1. A Nation where the rural and urban divide is reduced to a
2. A Nation where there is an equitable distribution of energy
3. A Nation where agriculture, industry and service sector work
together in symphony, absorbing technology thereby resulting
in sustained wealth generation leading to higher employment
4. A Nation where education is not denied to any meritorious
candidate because of societal or economic discrimination.
5. A Nation which is the best destination for the most talented
scholars and scientists all over the world.
6. A Nation where the best of health care is available to all the
billion population and the communicable diseases like AIDS/
TB, water and vector borne diseases, cardiac diseases and
7. A Nation where the governance uses the best of the
technologies to be responsive, transparent, easily accessible
and simple in rules, thereby corruption-free.
8. A Nation where poverty has been totally eliminated, illiteracy
and crime against women are eradicated and the society is
9. A Nation that is prosperous, healthy, secure, peaceful and
10. A Nation that is one of the best places to live in, on the
earth and brings smiles on a billion plus faces.
These are the ten dimensional transformations needed for
competitive India thereby Developed India and we have to work for.
452 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
As you all know, India has a vision - India 2020. That is before the
year 2020, India has to become a developed nation and the country
has human resource and natural resources. I have discussed all these
in detail in my website: www.presidentofindia.nic.in.
When I see you all students I would like to conclude by narrating
the event I have witnessed during my South Africa visit, particularly
I saw a magnanimity in victory in a great leader. Let me share it with
I met a great personality who was responsible for the freedom of
South Africa. Particularly for the young people, you can learn two
lessons. They are: indomitable spirit and virtue of forgiveness. He is
none other than Dr. Nelson Mandela.
Cape Town is famous for its Table Mountain; it has got three
peaks called Table Peak, Devil Peak, and Fake Peak. Between the
peaks it was a beautiful sight throughout the day, sometimes dark
clouds and sometimes white clouds embracing the peaks. Table
Mountain is very close to the coast of the Atlantic Ocean. We travelled
by helicopter to Robben Island from Cape Town in 10 minutes flight.
By fast powered boat it will take 30 minutes to reach the Robben
Island. When we reached the Island, except sea roaring, the whole
island was silent symbolizing the thought: this is the place the freedom
of individual was chained. We were received at the Island by Mr.
Ahmed Kathrada, a South African, who was a co-prisoner. What
surprised me was this: can you imagine a tiny room, where sleeping
and all human needs have to be fulfilled. It has to be remembered
that Dr. Nelson Mandela, who was 6 feet tall was imprisoned in that
room for 26 years - fighting against the apartheid. The major part of
his life was spent in this silent Island. He used to be taken for quarrying
in the nearby mountain for a few hours in bright sun. This is the time
his sight got damaged. In spite of his body being tortured, he revealed
to the world the indomitable spirit in him. This is the time he evolved
a manuscript of freedom in tiny letters every day, when the jail wardens
went to sleep. This small tiny lettered manuscript finally became the
famous book of Mandela, "A long walk to freedom".
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 453
It was a great event for me to meet him in his house in
Johannesburg. Dear friends, I would like to share with you, when I
entered Dr. Nelson Mandela's house, I saw his three dimensional
form with cheerfulness: the mighty man who got the freedom for
South Africa from the tyranny of apartheid. And also a person when
he became the President of South Africa he gave the people freedom
to move, freedom to live in South Africa to those people who specialized
in apartheid and ill-treated and put him in jail for 26 years. Nelson
Mandela accepted them as equal citizens who ill treated them practising
apartheid. I felt that, I am touching the hand of a Mighty Soul. When
he started walking he used to have a walking stick, he discarded the
walking stick; I became his support - walking stick. Dear friends, a
big lesson that we learnt from this personality Dr. Nelson Mandela
which is explained in one of the Thirukkurals written 2200 years
^(sijTOTn QiFiusjnanij ^nrjja^a) ^GUir^rTCMT
which means, for those who do ill to you, the best punishment is
returning good to them.
Now I would like to administer the Oath for enlightened citizenship.
1. I will love whatever profession I take up and I will try to
2. From now onwards I will teach at least ten persons who
cannot read and write to read and write.
3. I will plant ten saplings/trees and ensure their growth.
4. I will go to rural and urban areas to reform at least five
persons from the habits of addiction and gambling.
5. I will take responsibility for removing the pain of ailing
454 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
6. I will participate in the mission of realizing the economic
strength of India by combining it with an education with
value system and by transforming religion into a spiritual
7. I will not support any differenti ation on account of community
8. I will always be a friend of the mentally and physically
challenged and I will work hard to make them feel normal.
9. I will celebrate the success of my country and my people.
West Bengal is well known for freedom movement, for scientific
innovations, literary and poetic achievements. Dear young friends,
time has come for West Bengal to become a pioneer for another big
movement. This movement has to start from our hearts, from home
and from schools. Our nation in spite of all our best natural and
human resources is haunted by corruption in public life, power and
money. Only youth can change the situation. I will request you to
take the following oath.
10. I will lead an honest life free from all corruption and I will
set an example for others to adopt a transparent way of life.
Will you take up this movement towards corruption eradication
right from your home?
Let me once again greet all the members of the Scottish Church
Collegiate School on the occasion of 175th year celebration. My
best wishes to all of you for the success in the mission of promoting
Music - An Elevating Experience for all
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the conferment of the Sangeet
Natak Akademi Awards for the year 2005. I greet the organizers,
musicians, dancers, theatre artists, folk artists, art lovers and
distinguished participants. The Sangeet Natak Akademi, which is now
53 years of age, has honoured many practitioners, Gurus and scholars
in the performing arts, who represent the nation's highest achievement
in Music, Dance and Drama. When I think of classical music I find
that every Raga has a special purpose and meaning. I extend my
congratulations to all the recipients of the Sangeet Natak Akademi
Ratna and Sangeet Natak Akademi Puraskar for the year 2004. Today,
I would like to talk on the topic "Music is a divine manifestation".
Let me share with you a musical experience.
I recently attended a function to celebrate the 100 years of
Bangalore Gayana Samaja. On this occasion, they recognized three
artists: Hindustani Vocalist Dr. Gangubai Hangal (93 years), Carnatic
vocalist Dr. R.K. Srikantan and Mirudangam Vidwan Shri Vellore
Ramabadran with the centenary award. As a part of the celebrations,
there was a programme by the Violin Maestro Dr. E. Subramaniam.
He was accompanied by another young Violinist, Mridangam, Ghatam,
Kanjira and Morsing Vidwans.
The artists before starting the music offered their prayers to the
Almighty and paid their respects to the audience. The recital began
with the kriti 'Vathapi Ganapatim Bhaje' composed by Muthusamy
Dikshitar on Hamsadwani Raga and Adi Tala. L. Subramaniam played
the violin solo; then together with young violinist in combination.
Then the violin artist shared in sequence with each artist Violin,
Mridangam, Morsing and Kanjira in the background of Swaram. The
way the Maestro recognized the best of performance of every artist
Address during the Conferment of Sangeet Natak Akademi Awards 2005, Vigyan
Bhawan, New Delhi, 26 August 2005
456 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
was indeed a beautiful scene. Every artist was bringing out the best
of the music and it was well recognized by the audience. The peak
was yet to come. In the final phase, all the artists together with the
violin in the mid stream performed in unison and the whole audience
merged with the musical rhythm.
The scene was indeed like a confluence of multiple river streams
flowing rhythmically into the ocean of divine music. The twenty minutes
of the integrated musical performance of the artists took the audience
to the plane of bliss. There was a standing ovation from the audience
for the musical performance that came out of the integration of hearts
and minds of the artists. The period of rhythmic divine music is
indeed an elevating experience to all of us. Music transcends thousands
of minds bringing peace and happiness. When I see you all friends,
belonging to that tradition, I salute you all.
The country has multiple organisations such as Indian Council
of Cultural Relations, Sangeet Natak Akademi, and similar institutions
in the State sectors and the orivate initiatives such as Kala Kshetra,
Music Akademi, several drama and music troupes for promoting music,
dance and drama. It is essential to bring the best from all parts of the
country. The Sangeet Natak Academy can have the specialist team
for various regions for searching the talent in the music, dance and
drama, encourage the best and bring them to participate in the festivals.
The aim should be to reach a larger number of people particularly the
youth so that our ancient culture is preserved, nurtured and passed on
to the next generation, in all its richness.
Divine compositions of Purandaradasa and Sadasiva Brahmendra
continue to uplift the minds of millions even this day. When we hear
Balamurali Krishna sing 'Cetaha Sriramam' or the Dhun of Ustad
Bismillah Khan in Shehnai or when we hear Pandit Shiv Kumar
Sharma's Ragini Yamen on Santoor, it is difficult to express the joy
and elevated thoughts in words. It can only be experienced and
felt. Similarly, when we hear Kishori Amoankar sing "nainanu
neenuu bahe" or a ballad of Bhojpuri; or Papanasam Sivan's "Amba
manam kanindhu" even if we do not follow the exact words, the
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 457
Drama has been a great form of entertainment for invigorating
the minds of people. It can be a powerful medium for messages and
planting excellent imaginative thoughts for young and old. When I
was in school, I have seen many dramas being enacted in the schools
and even outside. This form of art has been under great pressure due
to cinema, TV and multimedia, which have their own role. But we
need to recapture many of our ancient drama forms, and rich traditional
stories embedded in them.
I would like to explain my personal experience in native theatre
of arts. During the period 1985 to 1995, quite often I used to travel by
road from Bhubaneshwar to Chandipur in Balasore District of Orissa.
It is a five hours drive from Bhubaneshwar airport. In this journey I
would be passing through a number of villages covering at least five
districts of Orissa, during the nights. During the Navratri period it
used to be a beautiful scene of dance, music and drama played by
village artists in front of different images of the Goddess Durga
throughout this route. This used to be a great musical and happy meeting
of the citizens of that area and it also generated a large number of
local talents. This should be encouraged and appreciated by institutions
such as Sangeet Natak Akademi.
I have briefly discussed earlier about the spreading of the classical
dance, music and drama to the masses. There is another crucial problem
needing urgent solution. There are many young artists from all over
the country especially from smaller towns and villages. For them to
pursue artistic profession even on part-time basis is a difficult job.
There are many entry barriers. Sangeet Natak Akademi would need
to address it urgently. Otherwise, best of the young persons who do
not have patrons to promote them, may not get into artistic profession
at all. If talented youth from different walks of life are facilitated to
enter into art, the richness and diversity of the Indian art forms will
get the much needed nourishment.
To pay tribute to the India's cultural heritage and to celebrate
performing art a series of cultural programmes are organised under
the auspices of "Indradhanush". The aim of "Indradhanush" is to
acknowledge the contribution of the renowned as well as the young
458 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
artists. So far, we have organized eighteen such programmes. It started
with the performance of Pandit Jasraj. He sang among other bhakti
geets, Govind Damodar and Mero Allah Meherbaan. Some of the
others who performed include Flute Maestro Pandit Hari Prasad
Chaurasia, Rudra Veena by Asad Ali Khan, Saraswathi Veena by E.
Gayathri and Odissi dance performance by Sonal Mansingh. Recently,
a Ghazal performance by Shri Jagjit Singh was conducted. I would
like to share with you my experience with two Nadaswaram Vidwans
- Sheikh Mahboob Subhani and Smt. Subhani. They gave a beautiful
Nadaswaram recital performance to the Rashtrapati Bhavan audience.
After the recital I requested the couple to perform for the differently
abled children, whenever they get an opportunity. They made it a
point to perform for some of our special children in Chennai and I
understand that it gave lot of happiness to these special children. This
is a very noble cause and 1 would request the artists assembled here
to follow this example whenever they get an opportunity to make the
In addition, we have also organized several cultural programmes
of young artists where, Master Abhay Goyal, an eight year old boy
played Piano. Master Siddharth Nagarajan, a seven year old boy, played
the drums, sixteen year old L. Athira performed violin and children
of Sridevi Nrithyalaya, Chennai performed Bal Ramayan dance drama.
Let us encourage our children and youth to participate in arts and
culture and demonstrate their abilities which will motivate the other
children to perform better in their field of expertise, and enable the
nation to preserve our cultural heritage and bring about societal harmony.
I had the opportunity to witness the great exponents of music,
dance and drama. The experience of listening and seeing them makes
me think whether music and dance can be used as an instrument for
ensuring global peace and act as a binding force. Fortunately, we
have a rich civilizational heritage of more than 5000 years blending
literature, music, dance and drama.
The music and dance takes you to a different plane and gives
you a breeze of happiness and peace. I believe such music and dance
will emanate only when the artists themselves are in peace and in a
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 459
happy state of mind. In this state they will become an elegant example
of propagators of peace and happiness to the society.
Normally the peak performance of an Indian classical music needs
minimum one hour. It is essential to attract the youth to this kind of
musical performance through the TV advertisement clips by showing
the peak musical performance as a special 'minute bulletins' to catch
the imagination of the youth.
When we give these awards, I realize that we are admiring and
recognizing the performance of experienced artists. In addition to
this, we have to admire and nurture upcoming artists, in different
parts of the country including the remote areas. At least 10 awards
may be instituted for celebrating the young artists below 20 years. I
suggest a special team should be deputed for spotting the artists by
visiting the rural areas.
I once again congratulate the recipients of Sangeet Natak
Akademi awards. My best wishes to all the members of Sangeet
Natak Akademi in their mission of preserving, nurturing and promoting
our traditional performing art form among the youth of the nation.
J AM DELIGHTED to be in Shillong in this beautiful environment
and interact with the Shillong children. My greetings to all the
students, teachers and their parents. Recently, I happened to see
the prize winning paintings of the children who participated in the
Shankar's International Painting Competition. The paintings reflected
the beautiful minds of the children. I would like to share with you
I was very happy to see the German girl Anthea Neums bringing
out her imagination of how the season of Easter looks like in the
rural environment; the bright colours that she has chosen reminded
me of my home town on the seashore, where I spent my childhood
days. In the same book, 14 year girl Supraja Chakravarthy, from India
narrates a story about the homely middle class morality and how the
votes are purchased during an election. It is clear that the young mind
Aardhra Krishna (13), has worn her thinking cap on and let her
imagination fly. She has visualized how the earth will look like around
3000 AD. In her imagination, the citizens are forced to migrate to
Mars and have made Mars the home to a flourishing civilization. This
advanced civilization, which was man-made comes suddenly under
threat created by nature in the form of an asteroid of Jupiter. The
asteroid from Jupiter was coming towards Mars and Mars was in danger
of extinction. The scientists on Mars come up with a very innovative
plan of a barrage of nuclear cannons to attack the oncoming asteroid.
The bombardment destroys the asteroid and the year 3000 sees a Martian
civilization surviving from the fury of the nature by scientific innovation.
What a beautiful scientific thinking of Aardhra Krishna!
Speech while Interacting with Shillong School Children, Raj Bhavan, Shillong,
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 461
I was amazed about the poem written by a 12 year old girl Anna
Sinyakova from Russia - "Never think of illness". I always believed
that there will be some problem or the other while doing important
tasks, but problems should not become the master. My advice
particularly to the young children is that you should defeat the problem
and succeed. The same thoughts are echoed by Anna Sinyakova from
Russia. She sends out a very strong message of encouragement and
advice through her poem that you must have the courage to face any
disease to keep up the human well-being.
I liked the painting of Savidhya Kumari Premasundera, a ten
year old girl from Sri Lanka. The way she has imagined the scene of
the fishing and the fishermen is testimony to the alertness and the
observation capability of the young mind. Kenya's thirteen year old
boy recounts his personal experience of his maiden flight which was
hijacked. The entire incident had been so deeply engraved in the young
mind. The boy has been very eloquent in bringing out his experiences
and emotions in his write-up.
I would like to share with you some events which narrate the
experiences on how to subjugate failures and succeed in our mission
According to the Laws of Aerodynamics, the shape of the bumble
bee is such that it should be impossible for it to fly. But the bee's
determination to fly is strong. The bee keeps fluttering its wings and
its life propels the bee. This high frequency vibration creates a vortex
which enables it to fly. With determined efforts you can always succeed
against established beliefs. That is the power of creativity.
Not only was the bumble bee's flight, even the human flight
was considered impossible. In 1890, a well-known scientist, Lord
Kelvin, who was the President of Royal Society of London, said that,
"any thing heavier than air cannot fly, and cannot be flown". Two
decades after that, the determination of the Wright Brothers made the
impossible possible and proved that man could fly. Their success is a
story of how sheer perseverance and creativity could lead to success.
This singular achievement has made the transportation revolution and
made the world smaller.
462 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
The famous rocket designer Von Braun, built the Saturn-V to
launch the capsule with astronauts and made moon walk a reality. He
once said that "If I am authorized, I will remove the 'word impossible'
If you want to become a poet, writer or painter, you have to have
a dream, and then acquire knowledge, work hard, you achieve the
results as the bumble bee, as the Wright Brothers, as the famous Indian
scientist Sir C.V. Raman, as the painters like M.F. Hussian, Picasso,
as a painter and sculptor like Amarnath Sehgal, as a poet like
Rabindranath Tagore. My dear children the future is waiting for you
to enter your name along with those doyens of arts and science.
Now I would like to talk to you about the Indian Chandrayan
Prof. Vikram Sarabhai gave a mission in the 1960s on what ISRO
should do. He gave us a vision - that ISRO should design, develop
and launch its own rockets, that is, satellite launch vehicles. It should
launch communication satellites in geosynchronous orbits and remote
sensing satellites in polar sun-synchronous orbits. Both were needed
for applications - to connect people through communication satellites,
provide beneficial information to people and bring about connectivity
State to State, and country to country. Remote-sensing spacecraft are
intended to sense, to discover some of the natural wealth, forest wealth,
and help in assessing the drought and flood condition.
I can say that ISRO has successfully realized Prof. Vikram
Sarabhai's dream. What next?
Now we have the Chandrayan programme, that is, orbiting a
spacecraft around the moon. ISRO may land a small scientific payload
on the Moon. In future we may go for Lunar Mining which could
enable man to bring back to earth shipments of Helium-3, which is
reported to be abundant on the moon, as a valuable fuel for thermonuclear
Now I would like to give you a ten point Oath. Will you repeat
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 463
1. I will pursue my education or the work with dedication and
I will excel in it.
2. From now onwards, I will teach at least ten persons who
cannot read and write to read and write.
3. I will plant at least 10 saplings and shall ensure their growth
4. I will visit rural and urban areas and permanently wean away
at least 5 persons from addiction and gambling.
5. I will constantly endeavour to remove the pain of my suffering
6. I will not support any religious, caste or language
7. I will be honest and endeavour to make a corruption free
8. I will work for becoming an enlightened citizen and make
9. I will always be a friend of the mentally and physically
challenged and will work hard to make them feel normal,
like the rest of us.
10. I will proudly celebrate the success of my country and my
Enriching the Society through Education
J AM INDEED delighted to be in the Mizoram University campus
and interact with the students and Faculty. I take this opportunity
to congratulate all the teachers, students and staff of this University
and all those who have contributed in promoting excellence in
educational standards of this University. Today I would like to share
with you the thoughts on "Enriching the Society through Education".
Any University is judged by the level and extent of the research
work it accomplishes. This sets in a regenerative cycle of excellence.
Experience of research leads to quality teaching and quality teaching
imparted to the young in turn enriches the research. Research brings
transformation and development and also enhances the quality of
education. Both the research and teaching are being carried out in the
best traditions of Mizoram University. Let me share with this important
gathering on the two phase progress of science and technology in
In India, science and technology took a two-phase progress with
the momentum created in 1930s, by the great scientists of international
repute. They gave the country the confidence. We remember the
pioneering contributions to science made by Chandrasekhar
Subramaniam for his Chandrasekhar limit and black hole, Sir C.V.
Raman for his discovery of the "Raman effect", Srinivasa Ramanujan
for his contributions towards number theory, J.C. Bose in the area of
microwaves, S.N. Bose, famous for Bose-Einstein statistics and
Meghnad Saha for "Thermo-Ionization Equation". This phase, I consider
the glorious phase of Indian science. The scientific foundation laid
by them triggered the later generations. The unique similarities of all
these scientists are that they had dedicated their entire life for the
cause of scientific research and the spirit of inquiry for the fields that
Speech while Interacting with the Students and Faculty of Mizoram University,
Mizoram, 24 September 2005
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 465
they have chosen amidst all the hurdles and problems in their life.
Science always gives life time missions to the scientists, and then
only success comes. It is a question of dedication, commitment and
understanding and also the environment for research in science, which
gives birth to the scientists for the nation. They inspired many later
generation scientists including G.N. Ramachandran, the originator
Let me now discuss on how India had built the S&T base and
drew the road map leading to national development using science
and technologies particularly in the field of defence, space and atomic
energy in the post independent era. The science and technology had
also fed critical inputs to reaching self-sufficiency in food through
the Green Revolution and milk production through the White revolution.
All of you know, in history, any country revolves itself initially
around a few stout and earnest knowledge giants. Particularly I took
interest to study the lives of three scientists, as I was interested in
their scientific technological leadership qualities that focused the
relationship of S&T and development of the nation. In the history of
India, there may be many but I was very close to these three great
personalities for one reason or the other. They are founders of three
great institutions. I worked in two of the institutions directly and one
in partnership. Dr. D.S. Kothari, a Professor in Delhi University was
an outstanding Physicist and also an Astrophysicist. He is well known
for ionization of matter by pressure in cold compact objects like planets.
This theory is complementary to thermal ionization work done by
Dr. Meghnad Saha his guru. Dr. D.S. Kothari set a scientific tradition
in Indian defence tasks when he became Scientific Adviser to Defence
Minister in 1948; He created a Board of Advisors to the Scientific
Advisor consisting of Dr. H.J. Bhaba, Dr. K.S. Krishnan and Dr. S.S.
Bhatnagar. Later the Board was renamed as Scientific Advisory Board
He established the Defence Science Centre to do research in
electronic material, nuclear medicine and ballistic science. He is
considered as the architect of defence science in India. His race
continued and followed up with momentum working and contributing
466 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
in the areas of strategic systems, electronic warfare systems, armaments
Now, let me discuss about Homi Jehangir Bhabha. He did research
in theoretical physics in Cambridge University. During 1930-1939,
Homi Bhabha carried out research relating to cosmic radiation. In
1939, he joined Sir C.V. Raman in IISc Bangalore. Later, he was
asked to start the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research with focus
on nuclear science, mathematical science and established Atomic Energy
Commission in 1948. Multi centres were born with his vision in
nuclear science to nuclear technology, nuclear power, nuclear devices
and nuclear medicine. These science institutions established multi
technological centres with basic science as a vital component. I am
sure our nuclear scientists and technologists will add to our country
20,000 MW power by the year 2020 as the vision propounded by our
Department of Atomic Energy.
Prof. Vikram Sarabhai, the youngest of the three, worked with
Sir C.V. Raman in experimental cosmic ray research. Prof Sarabhai
established Physical Research Laboratory (PRL) Ahmedabad with
Space research as focus. PRL was the cradle of Indian Space
Programme. Prof Vikram Sarabhai unfolded the space mission for
India in 1970 that we should build Satellite Launch Vehicle capability,
to put our communication satellites in the geo-synchronous orbit and
remote sensing satellites in the polar orbit. Also, he envisaged that
launch vehicles built in India should be launched from Indian soil.
This one visionary thought led to intensive research and development
in multiple fields of science and space technology. Many of us had
the fortune to be part of Prof. Vikram Sarabhai's vision. My team
and myself participated in India's first satellite launch vehicle
programme to put the satellite in the orbit. Today, India with her
20,000 scientific, technological and support staff in multiple space
research centres, supported by about 300 industries and academic
institutions, has the capability to build any type of satellite launch
vehicle to place remote sensing, communication and meteorology
satellites in different orbits, and space application has become part of
our daily life. Dear young friends, you have seen how visionaries of
a nation bring about economic transformation and technological change.
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 467
I would like you to emulate these visionaries, dream and work for
transforming India into a developed nation.
Now I would like to discuss how to nurture young talent.
I would like to narrate an incident during a function conferring
Prof. Norman E Borlaug with Dr. M S Swaminathan award, at Vigyan
Bhavan, New Delhi on the 15th of March 2005. Prof. Borlaug, a Nobel
Laureate and a well known agricultural scientist, at the age of 91 was
in the midst of all the praise showered on him from everybody gathered
there. When his turn came, he got up and highlighted India's
advancement in the agricultural science and production and said that
the political visionary Shri C. Subramaniam and Dr. M S Swaminathan
were the prime architects of First Green Revolution in India. He also
recalled with pride Dr. Verghese Kurien who ushered White Revolution
in India. Then the surprise came. He turned to scientists sitting in the
third row, fifth row and eighth row of the audience. He identified Dr.
Raja Ram, a wheat specialist, Dr S K Vasal, a maize specialist, and
Dr. B. R. Barwale, a seed specialist. He said, all these scientists had
contributed for our green revolution. Dr. Borlaug introduced them to
the audience by asking them to stand and ensured that the audience
cheered and greeted the scientists with great enthusiasm. This scene
I have not witnessed in our country, so far. This action of Dr. Norman
Borlaug, I call it as a Scientific Magnanimity. Young friends, if you
aspire to achieve great things in life, you need Scientific Magnanimity.
Think about it and correspond with me. It is my experience that great
mind and great heart go together. This will motivate the scientific
community and nurture team spirit. Here I am reminded of
QojdTGfT^ U} OITj )LlL_Lb LDFTITjSjltSjLb
It means the right thoughts become the seeds for the great
I would suggest that a website can be created for the Mizoram
University. This can become a common platform for providing
468 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
connectivity among the Faculty and students with other universities
located in different parts of the country. The website can document
the case studies and special achievements of the University and its
members and assist new entrants for acquainting themselves with
the university. You could also include provision for the students to
ask questions about their specific problems connected with education,
further studies, research and creation of an enterprise in different places
Yesterday, I read an interesting news which all of you should be
proud of. A new form of matter proposed 80 years ago by Indian
physicist S.N. Bose and Albert Einstein has been trapped inside a
minute storage ring by scientists at the California University who
says the "blob" might hold key to new quantum physics. The scientists
have created a "blob" of super cooled Bose-Einstein condensate and
have kept it running in circles inside a race track two millimeters
across. Now you can realize the value of work done by scientists 80
years ago and how it is useful to future scientists. This is the power
Every one of us has gone through the various phases of education
from childhood to profession. A scene appears in front of me. When
the child is empowered by the parents, at various phases of growth,
the child transforms into a responsible citizen. When the teacher is
empowered with knowledge and experience, good young human beings
with value systems take shape. When individual or a team is empowered
with technology, transformation to higher potential for achievement
is assured. When the leader of any institution empowers his or her
people, leaders are born who can change the nation in multiple areas.
When the women are empowered, society with stability gets assured.
When the political leaders of the nation empower the people through
visionary policies, the prosperity of the nation is certain. Definitely
Mizoram University will give the right type of education for empowering
people who have come from various walks of life.
My best wishes to all of you in your creative educational mission.
Virtual University - For Global Citizens r 1
"Education is a life-long journey whose
Destination expands as you travel"
O N 27 April 2005. we had sown the first seed for the three universities
to come together to move the frontiers of knowledge. Now I see,
the young sapling coming out of the seed in the form of first live
lecture in the virtual cyberspace. 1 am indeed delighted to be with
you on this important occasion of the combined gathering of the families
of the University of Calcutta, University of Madras and University
of Mumbai. My greetings to the Vice-chancellors, members of the
senates and faculties, students and other distinguished participants.
Today is an important day in the annals of Indian Universities. Three
of our pioneering universities have decided to work together and create
a new wave of synergy amongst our educational institutions, breaking
historical and geographical barriers This trend, 1 am sure, will be a
fore-runner for many such unification ventures amongst educational
institutions to strengthen the thought that at the frontier, there are no
As you are aware, the Prosperous India is powered by the national
economic development, the national economic development is pow ered
by competitiveness. The competitiveness is powered by knowledge.
Knowledge is powered by science, technology and innovation. Science,
technology and innovation are powered by investment rich resources.
Since Universities are the reservoir of knowledge and also the prime
knowledge generation centres of the nation, l would like to discuss
w ith you about a few thoughts around the topic "At the frontier there
Address to the Universities of Kolkata, Madras and Mumbai (Through Tele-Education
Delivery System) from Rashtrapati Bhavan, 3 October 2005
470 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
The whole purpose of education in a country like India is to
develop and enhance the potential of our human resource and
progressively transform it into a knowledge society. The knowledge
society will be a society producing products and services that are
rich in both explicit and tacit knowledge, thus creating value added
products. The real capital of this knowledge society will be its knowledge
workers. The society will be highly networked to create knowledge
intensive environment along with enabling process to efficiently create,
share, use and protect knowledge. Our education system should
re-align itself at the earliest to meet the needs of the present-day
challenges and be fully geared to participate in the societal
transformation. The networking of these three universities is the first
step towards creating the universities that could meet the demands of
the knowledge era - an era that was born out of convergence of
technologies and it is only natural that the human minds should also
converge in the knowledge era.
When the world was moving from the industrial to information
and knowledge era, we witnessed a changing pattern in the sectoral
share of GDP the number of people employed in each sector. The
sectoral share of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) percentage has
undergone a considerable change. Contribution of agriculture to India's
GDP has reduced from 39% to 22% during the period 1979 to 2004.
During the same period contribution of manufacturing sector has moved
up from 24% to 27% whereas the contribution from the services sector
has increased from 37% to 51%. There has been considerable change
in the employment pattern also. The percentage of people employed
in agriculture has come down from 64% to 54%. Simultaneously,
the percentage of people employed in manufacturing has gone up
from 15% to 19% and in the service sector from 20% to 27%. This
trend has to continue and by 2020 our employment pattern should
aim at 44% in agriculture, 21% in manufacturing and 35% in service
sectors. The displacement of 10% people from agriculture sector has
to be facilitated through skill enabling for undertaking value added
tasks in the rural enterprises so that migration to urban area is reduced.
Instead of the person from the rural areas going to urban towns in
search of jobs in manufacturing and services sectors, PURA (Providing
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 471
Urban Amenities in Rural Areas) facilitates creation of employment
in the rural areas itself. PURA achieves this by providing physical,
electronic and knowledge connectivities to a cluster of vil lages thereby
leading to their economic connectivity and prosperity. Knowledge
creation and knowledge utilisation is the key to the success of a PURA
programme. Here, the Universities have to play a major role in creation
and dissemination of knowledge.
I was studying different dimensions of knowledge society how
will it be different from the industrial economy. In the knowledge
economy the objective of a society changes from fulfilling the basic
needs of all round development to empowerment. The education
system instead of going by text book teaching will be promoted by
creative, interactive self learning - formal and informal with focus
on values, merit and quality. The workers instead of being skilled or
semi-skilled will be knowledgeable self empowered flexibly skilled.
The type of work instead of being structured and hardware driven
will be less structured and software driven. Management style will
be delegative rather than being directive. Impact on environment
and ecology will be strikingly less compared to industrial economy.
Finally, the economy will be knowledge driven and not industry driven.
To meet these needs we require Knowledge Grid.
What the three of the oldest and prestigious universities had started
should soon spread like a wildfire but with passion and engulf the
entire education system both vertically and horizontally, starting from
kindergarten to remote research and spreading across multiple disciplines
without any concern for geographical location or the time. This has
been the motivation for the nation's programmes on knowledge grid.
Promoting excellence in the education system will need creation of
world class educational institutions. This will involve formulation of
innovative methods by which information and knowledge are accessed
fast for meeting the demands of national challenges pertinent to your
academic and research and development activities.
We have rich knowledge institutions but what we have to add is
connectivity. This connectivity today technologically is possible but
would need creation of high band width reliable network infrastructure
472 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
to the extent of minimum 10 Gigabits per second all through the country
to provide uniform access of knowledge in different regions.
The connectivity must transform into a network and provide a
seamless access between the knowledge creator that is the Universities
and institutions, the R & D institutions that convert knowledge into
products and the knowledge consumer that is the industry and people.
As an example, now let us take Jatropha plantation to generation of
bio-fuel. The Jatropha plantation technology and methods are provided
to the farmers by the agricultural university. The R & D institutions
work on converting Jatropha seeds into bio-fuel and by-products. A
rural small scale industry will establish an enterprise for producing
bio-fuel and marketing it. The rural development and agricultural
ministry provide the policy framework for pricing and use of bio
fuel. Also, there is a need for the University to work on the development
of a variety of hybrid seeds for increasing the productivity of oil from
the seeds. Thus we can see there is a close cycle between the farmer,
researcher, educational institutions, industry and the user requiring
variety of knowledge input at different stages which can be made
available effectively only if all these institutions are brought under
knowledge grid and a common communication protocol with high
speed access is made available to them. Connectivity is the key to
success of our development programmes.
On 2nd June 2005, the Government has constituted a Knowledge
Commission to deal with matters relating to institutions of knowledge
production, knowledge use and knowledge dissemination. The mandate
of the Commission is to sharpen India's "knowledge edge". It will
also explore ways in which knowledge can be made more widely
accessible in the country for maximum public benefit. Also it will
advise on how India can promote excellence in the education system
to meet the knowledge challenges of the 21st century. In effect the
aspirations of India to become a developed nation capitalizing on its
knowledge and its importance in the emerging new era, will solely
depend on the contributions of the universities to the national missions.
Some of the major areas where our Universities can contribute
are energy (solar, bio-fuel and Thorium Nuclear Reactor), second
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 473
green revolution for increasing the food grains output from the existing
200 million tonnes per annum to 400 million tonnes with reduced
availability of land, reduced availability of water and reduced farm
work force and provision of potable safe drinking water to all the
citizens, energy-efficient green habitat for the citizens, enhancing our
ICT export market through the development of knowledge products
and develop nano-technology-based system for societal transformation.
Some of the examples are energy storage, production and conversion,
enhancing agricultural productivity, water treatment, disease diagnosis
and screening, drug delivery system, food preservation and storage,
air pollution control and ventilation, construction, health monitoring
and vector / pest destruction and control.
In addition to the above, the teachers from humanities and
languages are also an important component of our educational system.
They give the moral, ethical, cultural and commercial values. This
will protect the world from degrading towards a very cruelly materialistic
one. The humanities and language experts can also carry our culture
and heritage exchange through a well planned tele-education delivery
system to the twenty million people of Indian origin living in different
parts of the world. I am sure one day India will become the role
model for creating and consuming knowledge products and still
maintaining its moral, ethical and cultural value system about which
many generations of humankind would be proud of. Also, they can
meet the requirement of their Indology students of different countries
who are keen to learn about Indian culture and Indian languages. This
connectivity will enrich not only the students of the Universities but
will also make them cultural ambassadors of the nation. Similarly,
this collaboration can lead to unlimited growth in academic research
and application activities in all the faculties such as arts and sciences,
management studies, law, linguistics, history, geography, geology
and other branch students.
During my recent visit to Russia I had suggested the launch of a
youth satellite exclusively for use by youth of different countries. I
am sure the members of the three universities assembled here would
like to participate in the youth satellite programmes. In this connection,
a good example is the micro satellite built by Anna University in
474 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
collaboration with ISRO. In a similar way, I suggest a common mission
between these three universities can be evolved. Now I would like to
discuss about virtual university.
The Association of three universities should lead to a creation
of a virtual university through networking which you have already
started. You have to only position the infrastructure and the modalities
in place so that you can become the first operational virtual university
in the country combining 450 years of accumulated academic and
research strength of the three universities.
In the world which is shrinking to become a global village, it is
also important to produce students who ultimately become the
knowledge workers in our economy to be global citizens. In this regard,
at least to start with we must be able to offer courses of predictable
standards across the three universities. A student should be able to
attend courses of his choice without geographical constraints. The
three universities must co-sign the new degrees from this Virtual
University. The day when all our universities begin to offer this
flexibility and assure constant and consistent high quality, India could
proclaim to be the knowledge super power.
While it is unarguable that the Virtual Universities provide us
with technologies of the future and the most economic way of scaling
high quality education in the country, they are no substitute to the
campus-based education. The challenge to the Virtual Universities is
to provide the best of breed of both the worlds. In this process, we
could plan an optimum mix of direct contact hours between the students
and the teachers and also amongst the students themselves. These
interactions should also be used as a platform to excite the students
to take to learning in the new paradigm.
In the world of Virtual Universities the equitable access to all its
participants is the primary goal. Unlike in the real world, where the
equitable access is always the democratic average, in the Virtual
Universities the equitable access always means the equitable access
to the best resources - be it the teachers, be it the library, be it the
laboratory, available across the network. In effect, the network brings
the best of its participants to every one of its participants.
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 475
The three phases of learning are the lectures, library and
laboratories. They require increasing bandwidth from a few 100's of
kilobytes for the lectures to a few megabytes for the formal digital
libraries and the informal world of knowledge from the Internet, to
gigabits of connectivity for remote laboratories in the world of high
precision science and engineering. As the bandwidth becomes cheaper
and available in abundance, universities should be able to run remote
instruments and facilities as complex as NMR to Wind tunnels. This
will ultimately provide equitable access to the entire education system
beyond just the lectures and the lecturers. Thus the bandwidth is the
demolisher of imbalances and a great leveller in the knowledge society.
At Rashtrapati Bhavan, I meet many experts from all over the
world and from India, who have made the virtual universities of very
high quality. At the same time, I also see in some of them a myth that
many in the educational segment have started to have a wrong notion
that anything connected to the web is a Virtual University. There
must be a model code of evaluation and accreditation of quality Virtual
Universities in the country and any impersonator must be weeded
out immediately. For a nation, that has grown from maintaining quality
in class room based education to distance education, this is a natural
A model Virtual University, which can be emulated by others,
should have some of the following characteristics:
a) It should have a framework to identify experts of national/
international eminence in specialized areas and interweave
the lectures to form a common curriculum.
b) It should be able to co-ordinate, organize, schedule and
broadcast the lectures of specialists.
c) It should record the live transmission of the lecture with
interaction details in a data bank for easy access by participants
d) It should provide a common data exchange format and a
common look and feel for all of the lectures - be it live or
476 APJ ABDUL iCALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
ej Digitize all the university libraries and make it available
for seamless access by all the universities,
f) Enable a digital collaboration among the students and faculties
of the three universities and also from outside universities
for knowledge sharing, knowledge dissemination and
g) The universities need to become teacher assisted, technology
enhanced and learner centric.
h) They should have "an always on connectivity" and must be
able to provide bandwidth on demand and meet even the
high bandwidth demands of immersive learning and remote
experimentation using high precision expensive instruments.
I wish that with the dedication and the history of achievements
of the three universities - Calcutta, Madras and Mumbai, this
collaboration would lead to the creation of the high quality Virtual
University that will attract the nation's best talents and produce
borderless knowledge workers who will strive to make the world a
much better place to live in. The Virtual University should graduate
into a modern Nalanda and attract students from ail over the world -
a true global village producing global citizens with borderless talents,
All this would lead to synergizing the strengths of the universities
in promoting quality education to our students in a cost effective manner
located in these three regions leading to academic excellence and
promotion of know ledge society.
For India to be a developed nation, it is essential that there is a
massive scheme for development of the rural areas, as 70% of our
copulation lives in villages. Hence the Government has announced
the introduction of a scheme called PURA, i.e. Providing Urban
Amenities in Rural areas. PURA model envisages habitat design to
improve the quality of life in rural areas and also removes urban
congestion. It is essentially conceived around four types of
connectivities with the aim to speed up process of achieving total
rural prosperity. Physical connectivity enables high mobility to villagers
so that they can interact and use common infrastructure such as school.
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 477
health centres and markets. The electronic connectivity with telephones
and internet facilities bring them together and interact with anyone
anywhere m the world. Knowledge connectivity will transform the
rural area in education, health care, application of science for crop,
water and forest management, environment protection and co-operative
roduct marketing. The combination of all these three connectivities
provides the economic connectivity with small-scale industries, agro
and food processing, warehouses, micro pow er plants, renewable energy
arms and banks. The four connectivities will bring prosperity to the
villagers and improve quality of life. Universities of Calcutta, Madras
and Mumbai can adopt 20 to 30 villages located near the metropolitan
cities and create a model PURA with all the connectivities and
enterprises with large scale employment generation potential.
A PURA complex each can be planned in Diamond Harbour
region of West Bengal by Faquirchand College, Chengalpattu region
in Tamil Nadu by Vedachalam Government Arts College and Palghar
region in Thane district, Maharashtra by Sonopant Dandekar Arts,
Science and Commerce College. The Universities can become
facilitators Dy nominating the support of Departments of Management
Studies, Computer Science and Information Technology, Bio
technology and Biology, Energy and other related areas of specialization
for planning and executing these PURA complexes in collaboration
with the Government, industries ana societal transformers like NGOs.
funding can come from the Government, banks, industry, NGOs and
self-help groups. The graduates and post-graduates of the University
should become enterprise leaders and become employment generators
rather than employment seekers in these rural enterprises. Now I
would like to discuss a model PURA which is in operation in Tamil
Last year 1 had visited Penvar Maniammai college of Technology
for Women and inaugurated a PURA Complex. I thought of sharing
with you the developmental concept of a cluster of over 65 villages
near Vallam, Thanjavur district of Tamil Nadu which involves a
population of 3 lakhs. This PURA complex has all the three
connectivities - physical, electronic and knowledge - leading to
economic connectivity. The centre of activity emanates from the women
478 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
engineering college that provides the electronic and knowledge
connectivity. I understand that now five of the Periyar PURA villages
have been connected with Wi-MAX connectivity. Periyar PURA has
health care centres, primary to postgraduate level education and
vocational training centres. This has resulted in large scale employment
generation and creation of a number of entrepreneurs with the active
support of 850 self-help groups. Two hundred acres of waste land
has been developed into cultivable land with innovative water
management schemes such as contour ponds and water sheds for storing
and irrigating the fields. All the villagers are busy in either cultivation,
planting Jatropha, herbal and medicinal plants, power generation using
bio-mass, food processing and above all running marketing centres.
This model has emanated independent of any government initiative.
The committed leadership has been provided by the Engineering
institution. This gives me the confidence that PURA is a realizable
proposition and this movement can be multiplied by thousands of
entrepreneurs, educational administrators and philanthropic institutions
with the support of the government agencies.
In the 21st century, India needs a large number of talented youth
with higher education for the task of knowledge acquisition, knowledge
imparting, knowledge creation and knowledge sharing. I am working
for it. At present India has 540 million youths under the age of
25 which will continuously be growing till the year 2050. Keeping
this resource in mind, the Universities and educational systems should
create two cadres of personnel: (1) a global cadre of skilled youth
with specific knowledge of special skills (2) another global cadre of
youth with higher education. These two cadres will be required not
only for powering the manufacturing and services sector of India but
also will be needed for fulfilling the human resource requirements of
various countries. Thus, the universities will have to work towards
increasing the through put of the higher education system from the
existing 6% to 20% by the year 2015, 30% by the year 2020 and 50%
by the year 2040. The other Indians who are not covered by the
higher education system should all have world class skill sets in areas
such as construction, carpentry, electrical systems, repair of mechanical
systems, fashion design, para-legal, para-medical, accountancy, sales
and marketing, software and hardware maintenance and service, software
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 479
quality assurance personnels etc. No Indian youth should be without
either a world class higher education or without world class skill sets.
This is the mission which must be undertaken by all our Universities
and the educational systems particularly the consortium of the three
universities namely Calcutta, Madras and Mumbai. I would like to
appeal to the youth who are from these universities to create new
models to make such a thing possible. We have to start right now to
realize this goal since the overall time available for such an educational
growth is short. A National Policy for creating a "Global Human
Development Cadre for India" has to emerge. I am working for this
For realizing excellence in education, what we need is quality
faculty, infrastructural facility, national and international high bandwidth
connectivity, availability of knowledge sources. In addition we need
a good learning environment, collaborative environment, exposure
to the best international practices and constant promotion of innovation
and creativity. The higher the research intensity in a University
environment, better will be the teaching quality. The collaboration of
the three universities should provide these features to all the constituents'
colleges in different regions and become role models for the entire
country in propagating attractive and high quality virtual education.
Each University, its faculty members and the students must try to say
"what they can give to other two universities." The capacity building
in areas of importance to the national development is a primary role
of the teachers. Today science and technology are directly linked to
the nation's economic development and their sustainability is related
to the applicability and relevance of education system in uplifting
the 260 million people living below the poverty line and those who
live in the rural and urban areas. The attitude of giving between the
universities will enhance the efficiency in knowledge creation and
speedy dissemination. Knowledge gets multiplied when connected
and circulated. The momentum that you have given to the concept of
Virtual University should soon engulf every university, school and
research institutions and make the whole India connected by a
Knowledge Grid. Finally I would request all faculty members of the
University, each one of them to ask themselves a question "what I
480 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
would like to be remembered for during the phase of my university
1 inaugurate the Virtual University formed by the consortium of
three Universities, you are the societal transformers of the 21 st century;
you work in the cyberspace and advanced technologies and produce
a visible growth in our economy in the real world. I wish you all
success in your mission of promoting excellence in education and
capacity building among students and finally evolving the creation
of the knowledge society for the nation.
Capacity Building for Energy
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the first Convocation of the
University of Petroleum and Energy Studies (UPES) in the beautiful
environment of Dehradun. I greet the Vice-Chancellor, the Faculty
members of UPES, the students and the distinguished guests. I am
particularly happy to be with you today in this institution, which is
one of the unique institutions in the country imparting education on
petroleum and energy which is lifeline for all activities in the nation.
I extend my congratulations to the graduating students of this University
today who will be the pioneers in energy technology and energy
management of the future. I was thinking what thoughts I could share
with you. I have selected the topic "Capacity Building for Energy
Energy is the lifeline of modern societies. But today, India has
17% of the world's population, and just 0.8% of the world's known
oil and natural gas resources. We might expand the use of our coal
reserves for some time and that too at a cost and with environmental
challenges. The climate of the globe as a whole is changing. Our
water resources are also diminishing at a faster rate. As it is said,
energy and water demand will soon surely be a defining characteristic
of our people's life in the 21st century.
Energy Security rests on two principles. The first, to use the
least amount of energy to provide services and cut down energy losses.
The second, to secure access to all sources of energy including coal,
oil and gas supplies worldwide, till the end of the fossil fuel era which
is fast approaching. Simultaneously we should access technologies
to provide a diverse supply of reliable, affordable and environmentally
Address at the First Convocation of the University of Petroleum and Energy Studies,
Dehradun, 16 October 2005
482 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
As you all know, our annual requirement of oil is 114 million
tonnes. Significant part of this is consumed in the Transportation Sector.
We produce only about 25 % of our total requirement. The presently
known resources and future exploration of oil and gas may give mixed
results. The import cost today of oil and natural gas is over Rs. 120,000
crores. Oil and gas prices are escalating; the barrel cost of oil has
doubled within a year. This situation has to be combated.
Energy Security, which means ensuring that our country can supply
lifeline energy to all its citizens, at affordable costs at all times, is
thus a very important and significant need and is an essential step
forward. But it must be considered as a transition strategy, to enable
us to achieve our real goal, that is, Energy Independence or an economy
which will function well with total freedom from oil, gas or coal imports.
Hence, Energy Independence has to be our nation's first and
highest priority. We must be determined to achieve this within the
next 25 years, i.e. by the year 2030. This one major, 25-year national
mission must be formulated, funds guaranteed, and the leadership
entrusted without delay as public-private partnerships to our younger
generation, now in their 30's, as their lifetime mission in a renewed
With all our indigenous resources and international co-operation,
we will be able to reach the target of 50 million tonnes within the
next decade. In such a situation, the oil sector has to diversify to
renewable and sustainable sources of energy. Keeping this in mind
University of Petroleum and Energy Studies has to structure its course,
research and academic content consistent with the national energy
Vision for the oil sector, I believe, has to aim at providing to the
nation at least 50% of its annual oil and gas need. Since we are dealing
with fossil material resources, it may not be possible to meet this
requirement fully from conventional oil exploration and extraction
The only way it appears to me is that to meet the 50% oil needs,
you have to go to the route of renewable energy, apart from your
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 483
further exploration of deep sea oil resources and enhancement of
recovery factor. Oil sector must consider that they are in the broader
business of energy and not merely oil and gas exploration. This will
enable the oil sector to enter into renewable energy routes such as
bio-fuel production and development of solar energy.
We have nearly 63 million hectares of wasteland available in
the country, out of which 33 million hectares of wasteland have been
allotted for tree plantation. Jatropha can grow well in this wasteland
with very little input. Once grown the crop has fifty years of life.
Fruiting can take place in this plant in two years. It yields upto five
tonnes per hectares oil seeds and produces two tonnes of bio-diesel.
Presently, the cost of bio-diesel through the plant is approximately
Rs. 17 to Rs. 19 per litre which can be substantially reduced through
choice of right size of the plant and using high yield variety plantation
which has already been established by the researchers. Bio-diesel plants
grown in one million hectares of land can yield a revenue of
approximately Rs. 2,000 crore a year and provide employment to over
one million people both for plantation and running of the extraction
plants. This is a sustainable development process leading to large
scale employment of rural manpower. Also, it will reduce the foreign
exchange outflow paid for importing crude oil. Use of Bio-diesel is
carbon neutral. This oil can also be used for soap and candle industries.
De-oiled cake is a raw material for composting and plantation is good
for honey production. We should absorb best of the technologies
available worldwide and start commercial operation soon, instead of
staying at pilot plant levels. I am happy that some of the States have
already taken initiatives in having Jatropha plantations in waste lands.
However, I also learnt that some farmers have problems in sale of
their Jatropha produce. Immediate attention should be given by the
respective State Governments to solve this problem so that those who
grow Jatropha do not suffer.
There has been a successful experiment which has been carried
out by Daimler-Benz in collaboration with CSIR laboratories of running
a Benz car from Pune to Delhi using 10% blend of bio-fuel, without
any modification to the engine. Now is the time for the state and
central governments to come out with a policy which can provide
484 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
answers to all the questions of the farmers, tmancial institutions,
entrepreneurs who are keen to set up the rally integrated bio-diesel
plant using Jatropha seeds from the plantation to production of pio-
diesel, by-products and their marketing. It is said that a number of
foreign consultants have shown interest in taking up jatropha plantation
and commissioning of plants in different areas of the country. I
would recommend to the University of Petroleum and Energy Studies
(UPES) to take the lead and enable establishment of model bio-diesel
plants with the inputs of Jatropha coming from different parts of the
country. UPES can also undertake research in collaboration with
Indian Institute of Petroleum and automobile industry for progressive
increase of bio-fuel percentage in blending Ultimate aim should be
to find engines, which can run on bio-fuel alone. This will need
research in automobile engines which can accept hundred per cent
bio-fuel for its operation. This will enable to work for a target of
realizing at least 30 million tonnes of bio-fuels within the next decade.
The second area where UPES can enter in a big way is harnessing of
India is well poised for the generation of solar energy in view of
the continuous availability of sunshine throughout the year. Installation
of centralized solar photovoltaic systems, which can be fed to a grid,
will be a long-term economically viable solution with added benefits
of pollution control. I am not unaware of the fact that India's economic
growth requires addition of 500 MW installed capacity every two
weeks and only the well-proven conventional technologies such as
Hydro, Thermal and Nuclear Plants can fulfil this demand in the short
term. But we need to think long term. Present solar cells have the
efficiency of 13 to 15%. But the research effort shows that, with the
advent of CNT/Polymer Composite Based Photovoltaic Cell, the
efficiency of Photovoltaic cell will increase to 50%. This can pave
the way for building mini 100 mega watt solar power stations in different
regions of the country like Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and
Tamil Nadu. UPES can design hundred megawatt captive power plants
based on solar energy which can be installed in Rajasthan or Andhra
Pradesh. The funding tor tins plant can be provided by' ONGC and
the respective state governments. UPES can take up indigenous research
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 485
on mission mode for producing CNT polymer composite-based
photovoltaic cells with an efficiency of 50% in collaboration with
other Universities, ONGC and R&D institutions.
Another area of concern emanates from possible oil spills in our
ports and near our coasts. India's present demand for oil is met through
import of about 85 million metric ton per annum. Hundreds of tankers
are needed to meet the growing import of oil in the foreseeable future.
Even if a fraction of the oil imported through these tankers spills in
the Indian waters, besides posing environmental danger, there is no
comprehensive response mechanism in place to deal with this threat
to marine environment. An accident to even one of these very large
vessels can spill up to 100,000 tonnes of oil into the Indian coastal
line. India's 7500 kms coastline therefore needs to be safeguarded
against ecological devastation from such oil spills.
The need of the day is to launch a mission to deal with oil spills.
UPES therefore has to take a lead to find technological response to
oil spills in collaboration with Indian Institute of Petroleum and Indian
I would like UPES to promote the concept of PURA (Providing
Urban Amenities in Rural Area) in different oil producing zones in
collaboration with ONGC. PURA envisages physical connectivity,
electronic connectivity and knowledge connectivity thereby creating
economic connectivity in the village clusters. For employment
generation in these areas, they can plan Jatropha and bamboo plantation
leading to value added product enterprises. Some of the products
could be bio-fuel generation, candles, bamboo furniture based on the
core competence of the particular region. They can provide knowledge
connectivity to these villages through establishment of village
knowledge centres connected to Kisan call centres. This type of societal
mission will enable UPES to deploy the graduates from this University.
Within the next fifty years, UPES must aspire to become a pioneer
in the application of alternative and sustainable sources of energy.
They should explore jointly with other academic and research institutions
to become a large scale provider of quality manpower required for
the energy industry in India and abroad. For realizing this, UPES
486 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
should adopt multiple strategies. One of the important resources in
the east and west coast is Methane Hydrate deposits, which are expected
to be available at a depth ranging from 400 - 700 metres below the
seabed. Seismic studies have shown high probability of existence of
these deposits. This can be tapped for producing energy. High-pressure
technology will be needed to enhance the gas yield. UPES must start
research work in this area right now. Underground coal gasification
is yet another promising area where UPES graduates can achieve
leadership. In essence, I would suggest to UPES to give world leadership
in quality manpower generation for exploration of energy sources,
diversification of energy sources, technology in underground coal
gasification and above all finding new ways of tapping energy wherever
it is, to meet the ever growing demand of the country.
Once again let me congratulate the graduating students of UPES
and my best wishes to the University for success in their task of creating
capacities among the students who will lead India in the mission of
energy independence in India.
Empowering the Indian Crafts and
J AM INDEED DELIGHTED to participate in this function for
presenting the National Awards for the year 2002, 2003 and 2004
to the artisans and weavers. I congratulate all the awardees for their
excellent contribution in preserving, promoting and enriching the
traditional and cultural heritage of our country through the unique
art-forms of crafting and weaving. I am sure such recognition for
the innovative and skilled workmanship of these creative persons,
who have come from different parts of the country, provides an
encouragement for others to work hard to bring prosperity to the
handicraft and weaving sector. I would like to talk on the topic
"Empowering the Indian crafts and weaving sector".
Handicraft and handloom sector together provides livelihood for
more than 12 million people in our country. Handicraft and handloom
sector contributes to over four billion dollars of export and has enormous
potential to provide productive employment to a large number of craft
persons and weavers. There are also opportunities to create enterprises
in rural, semi-urban and urban areas. However, we have to see how
we can empower our craftsmen and weavers such that people will get
interested in crafts work and specialized weaving work. That means
we have to build capacity amongst artisans and handloom weavers
through technology and training.
Some of the problems experienced by handloom weavers are
the availability of yam material and availability of the markets against
the competition from power looms. The advantage for our nation is
the potential of handloom sector in providing employment for a large
number of people in the household and self-managed co-operative
Address at the Presentation of National Awards to Master Craftspersons and Weavers,
Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi, 12 December 2005
488 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
societies spread across the country. This type of household small
enterprises, I have seen in Manipur and Assam. Every member of the
house weaves and wears their products. Also, if the handloom cottage
industry is properly empowered, it has a potential to become a
remunerative employment generator. In spite of competition from
power looms, the handloom products are liked due to its unique
quality, texture and uniqueness of design. Following are the suggestions
for empowering the handloom sector in the country within the next
a. Creation of exclusive design centres to promote handloom
products with inbuilt know-how from the fashion design
centres of the country. Design centres can be established in
all the regions where handloom work is predominant. Design
centres can be created on the lines of Tirupur garment design
b. Generation of export and national market through proper
business development practices and aggressive advertisement.
c. Elevating the skill of the weavers and upgrading the looms
and the processes taking into account the environmental
needs and the international market demand.
d. Creation of an "India brand" for handloom products through
a countrywide mission mode project.
e. Ensuring availability of the yam material at reasonable price
to the weavers. Wherever cotton is being cultivated it is
better to introduce the best practices of cultivation as has
been done in the Gheri Buttar in Punjab, to have a check on
the cost of the yarn.
Now, I would like to share with you one experience I had on
I visited a village called Gheri Buttar near Bhatinda in Punjab,
where I met the farmers who have successfully increased the production
of seed cotton from 460 kg per acre to 860 kg per acre in the year
2005. This has been achieved through a productive partnership between
farmers, agricultural scientists, textile industry supervisors and the
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 489
Government by following a scientific approach to farming, adopting
pre-harvest and post-harvest techniques with an assured market for
seed cotton. I have suggested to the farmers in that village to mount
a programme of second green revolution in cotton meaning that instead
of selling the cotton produce directly in the market they should convert
certain quantity of cotton into yarn, cloth and apparel in the village
complex itself and market it in the national and international markets.
This is the only way that the income of the farmers can substantially
Hence, I would like to link cotton production to yam, cloth, leading
to garment and apparel export business, which is a low investment
and large volume employment generator. Two centres are well known
Tirupur in Tamil Nadu and Ludhiana in Punjab for garment design to
production. India is presently exporting six billion dollars worth of
garments, whereas with the WTO regime in place, we should aim to
enhance the production and export of apparel and garments to over
18 billion dollars by 2010. This will need intense collaboration between
master weavers in the villages, NIFT, Textile Research Associations,
Cotton Research Association, textile industrialists and the government.
A mission mode programme should emerge. This will also be a large-
scale generator of employment particularly in the mral areas. By tripling
the export of apparels, we can add more than 5 million direct jobs
and 7 million indirect jobs in allied sector by diversifying the handloom
sector into apparel and other usages such as bandage cloth. This will
give employment potential particularly for some portion of handloom
weaving community and enrich the task in providing quality apparel
to the national and international clientele. Concerted effort is needed
in cotton research, technology generation, transfer of technology,
modernization and upgrading of ginning and pressing factories and
aggressive marketing strategy. NIFT can definitely assist in embedding
fashion in our handloom industry so that Indian handloom products
from yarn to garments carry innovative ideas for the final fashion
with enhanced value. Let me now discuss about the handicrafts sector.
I had a beautiful experience of some of the art products and the
men behind the products.
490 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Some time back, Smt Jaya Jaitly who is promoting Indian crafts
wrote to me about the talented carpet weaver from Bhadohi in Uttar
Pradesh named Ramjeet Bind. She mentioned in her letter that Shri
Ramjeet Bind has broken all the records in making finely knotted
carpets. He was at that time demonstrating weaving and selling his
durries at Delhi Haat. She wanted to bring Shri Ramjeet Bind to me
who had woven a carpet embossed with an interesting image. I agreed
to her request and on 1st January 2004 Shri Ramjeet came to me with
the framed carpet specimen along with Smt Jaya Jaitly. When I saw
the carpet, I was overjoyed with the craftsmanship and the realism he
had brought in weaving it. I asked him how much time it took for
making this carpet. He said it took nearly three to four weeks for
knotting the carpets. I asked him what would be its price. He told me
that it was priceless since his whole heart and soul has gone into the
creation of this work. When I had a re-look at the carpet, I saw that it
was really so. Such is the dedication, commitment and interest shown
by many of our weavers and crafts persons engaged in dastkari work
in our country. Since I am in the midst of crafts persons and artisans
I thought of sharing with you this incident which really touched my
heart. The second incident is about the Sirki Art.
One day a craftsman landed in Rashtrapati Bhawan and wanted
to see me. I agreed. His name was Shri Mohammed Sageer Mansoori.
He belonged to Kasganj, Etah (Uttar Pradesh). He said that he had a
special gift of making paintings using Sirki leaves available in the
forest. This gift was with him right from his early childhood. He
goes to the forest, collects the leaves, presses them in a special fashion
so that the insects do not attack and then he sequentially organizes
the leaves on hard surface and pastes them using Fevicol or Dentroid.
He showed me a few paintings which he has made including a view
of the Kutub Minar which was really beautiful. He creates beautiful
images and I was fully impressed with the quality of his paintings.
He uses certain techniques to enhance the shelf life of his paintings
which is around ten years. He told me that he normally takes around
a week for completing one painting. The problem he faces is in the
marketing of his paintings in the villages. He also needs help in
increasing the longevity of his paintings. Both craft works are indeed
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 491
excellence in art. Let me talk to you about some of the present day
architectural creations which touched my heart.
India is indeed famous for sculptors with architectural marvels.
Recently I have seen two great sculptor works of architectural creations
in two places. On 6th November 2005, I dedicated the Akshardham
cultural complex in New Delhi. Pramukh Swamiji Maharaj has inspired
thousands of people across the country and abroad and brought together
the best of the minds for creating a beautiful cultural complex. It has
become a place of education, experience and enlightenment. It creatively
blends the traditional stone art and architecture, Indian culture and
civilization, ancient values and wisdom and the best of modern media
and technology. Multiple layers of this complex expresses the strength
of the mind, willpower of the human being, indomitable spirit, flowering
kindness, fusion of scientific and medical talent, myriad colours of
varied cultures and ultimately the power of knowledge. In essence, it
is a dynamic complex with lively images of20,000 sculptures designed
and made by special artisans involving 300 million man hours of
work. I am also reminded of the beautiful sculptural work being done
at the Kalabhairavar temple at Adhichunchanagiri. It was indeed a
spiritual delight. The sculptors at work in Adhichunchanagiri had come
from south India. Such architectural complexes always stand out for
the excellence of Indian craftsmanship.
The work of craftspeople and artisans is the result of creativity.
This creativity comes from traditional knowledge. The crafts products
from this traditional knowledge are under constant attack from urban
industrial and multinational products (e.g. palm leaf, coir and rubber
products versus plastic products). The traditional knowledge is in
isolation in rural environment. This traditional knowledge has to be
integrated with technology with value addition and pro-active co
operative societies to empower craftspeople and artisans, making
avenues for direct marketing/selling. Instead of craftspeople coming
to urban marketing centres, the reverse phenomenon has to take place.
How is it possible? I have a suggestion triggered by Visvakarma's
children. I would recommend to the young graduates coming from
the National Institute of Fashion Technology and Sculptors and
492 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Architectural institutions to create small and medium enterprises in
the seven thousand PUR A complexes planned in different parts of
the country based on the core competence of the crafts people available
locally in each of the PURA complexes. This will enable preservation
of our traditional knowledge and also promotion of products at an
attractive price in the national and international market through value
addition. Marketing has to be arranged through internet and exhibitions
in marketing complexes such as Delhi Haat.
When we look at our civilizational heritage, it is an integrated
history of culture, people's way of living in various parts of the country
and the evolution of an integrated Indian society. Since I am in the
midst of a po werful creative audience I would like to share a thought
with you. This thought I got, after visiting the Ajanta and Ellora caves,
Mahabalipuram Pallava sculpture and many of our ancient temples
which have preserved the very important sculptures and paintings
without the names of the source and the date on which it was created.
The history of some of our civilizational heritage, paintings and sculpture
which are misplaced is to be recreated. I would suggest that the Ministry
of Textile in collaboration with the Ministry of Culture and many art
lovers and crafts persons take up the mission of creating a Heritage
Cave in the hill region in the backdrop of mountains. In this cave,
5000 years of our cultural heritage, paintings and sculpture should be
recreated with the knowledge base available in literature and with
cultural historians. It could be a mission for the decade for all our
best crafts persons in the country who can create the paintings and
sculpture of yesterday, today and tomorrow. This Heritage Cave should
be the place where the past meets the present and creates the future.
This will definitely become a place of attraction for all the national
and international tourists including researchers of art and culture.
Once again let me congratulate all the award winners and my
best wishes to all the crafts persons and weavers in their mission of
enriching our culture and creating value added products for the society.
Bihar Vision - Developed State by 2015
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in the Annual Convocation
2005 of the Patna University. I take this opportunity to congratulate
the University students for their academic performance. I greet the
Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor, professors and staff for their contribution
in shaping young minds to work for the nation in multiple fields. I
am happy to note that this University has contributed substantially in
the development of higher education in Bihar over the last nine decades.
I understand Patna University has produced a number of brilliant
academicians, technocrats, administrators, doctors, and social workers
of eminence. The Patna University has the distinction of having its
alumni important personalities like Mr. Hasan Imam, Dr. Rajendra
Prasad and also the present Chief Minister Shri Nitish Kumar. I would
like to discuss on the topic "Capacity Building for Entrepreneurship".
For the nation to develop, all the States have to develop. Bihar
has an important role to play in realizing this vision. We have to
look ahead with confidence and set our sights high to make Bihar the
leading example of resilience, growth, modernity and collective
achievement. I am personally optimistic about Bihar's success in
negotiating the path of high growth especially because of the superior
quality of human capital that the State is endowed with. This human
capital is spread in many parts of the country and contributing in
administration, management and agricultural farming. From this we
see that the core competence of Bihar in multiple areas is available in
Bihar for transformation of the State into a developed State. How
can Patna University empower the young people of Bihar through its
educational system? Capacity building with national development
tasks in mind should be the focus of the educational system.
A good educational model is the need of the hour to ensure that
the students grow to contribute towards the economic growth of a
Convocation Address at Patna University, Patna, 30 December 2005
494 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
nation. Can we sow the seeds of capacity building among the students?
There will be continuous innovation during the learning process. To
realize this, special capacities are required to be built in the education
system for nurturing the students. The capacities which are required
to be built are research and enquiry, creativity and innovation, use of
high technology, entrepreneurial and moral leadership.
The 21st century is about the management of all the knowledge
and information we have generated and the value addition we bring
to it. We must give our students the skills with which they find a way
through the sea of knowledge that we have created and continue with
life long learning. Today, we have the ability, through technology, to
really and truly teach ourselves to become the life-long learners. This
is required for sustained economic development.
The management of knowledge in the 21st century is beyond
the capacity of a single individual. The amount of information that
we have around is overwhelming. The management of knowledge
therefore must move out of the realm of the individual and shift into
the realm of the networked groups. The students must learn how to
manage knowledge collectively. When the information is networked
the power and utility of the information grows as square as stated by
Metcalfe's law. Information that is static does not grow. In the new
digital economy information that is circulated creates innovation and
contributes to national wealth.
Every student in our colleges should learn to know how to use
the latest technologies for aiding their learning process. Universities
should equip themselves with adequate computing equipment,
laboratory equipment, and Internet facilities and provide an environment
for the students to enhance their learning ability. In the midst of all of
the technological innovations and revolutions we cannot think that
the role of the teachers will be diminished. In fact the teacher will
become even more important and the whole world of education will
become teacher-assisted and would help in "tele-porting" the best
teacher to every nook and corner of the country and propagate the
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 495
The aptitude for entrepreneurship should be cultivated right from
the beginning and in the university environment. We must teach our
students to take calculated risks for the sake of larger gain, but within
the ethos of good business. They should also cultivate a disposition
to do things right. This capacity will enable them to take up challenging
Moral leadership involves two aspects. First it requires the ability
to have compelling and powerful dreams or visions of human betterment.
Moral leadership requires a disposition to do the right thing and influence
others also to do right things.
In sum, inquiry, creativity, technology, entrepreneurial and moral
leadership are the five capacities required to be built through the
education process. If we develop in all our students these five capacities,
we will produce "Autonomous Learner" a self-directed, self-controlled,
lifelong learner who will have the capacity to both respect authority
and at the same time is capable of questioning authority in an appropriate
manner. These are the leaders who would work together as a "Self
organizing Network" and transform any State as a prosperous State.
The most important part of the education is to imbibe the confidence
among the students in the spirit of "we can do it". These capacities
will enable the students to meet the challenges of our national mission
of transforming the nation into a developed country by 2020.
Any University is judged by the level and extent of the research
work it accomplishes. This sets in a regenerative cycle of excellence.
Experience of research leads to quality teaching and quality teaching
imparted to the young in turn enriches the research. Research brings
transformation and development and also enhances the quality of
Technology is the non-linear tool available to humanity, which
can affect fundamental changes in the ground rules of economic
competitiveness. Science is linked to technology through applications.
Technology is linked to economy and environment through manufacture
of knowledge products. Economy and environment are linked to
technology, which promotes prosperity to the society. We have to
496 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
use innovation to generate high value added products for becoming a
global player. The research areas of the Patna University must be
linked to the priorities of the State and the nation.
The most important sectors for sustainable national development
are agriculture, education, health care, water and energy. One of the
ways by which the rural agriculturists could increase their earnings is
by value adding to the agricultural produce by processing and
manufacturing. The farmers, either individually or through their co
operatives would market processed and value added items instead of
marketing the raw materials. This increase in the value-addition taking
place in the rural area itself is an indicator of the society moving
towards prosperity and knowledge era.
Dear graduating students, now you will be entering into the real
world of opportunities where you can be the employment generators
as discussed above through the capacity built in you by the university
system. There are five areas relevant to Bihar which I would like to
highlight on entrepreneurship and employment.
We have nearly 63 million hectares of wasteland available in
the country, out of which 33 million hectares of wasteland have been
allotted for tree plantation. Certain multi-purpose bio-fuel plants can
grow well in wasteland with very minimum input. Once cultivated,
the crop has fifty years of life. Fruiting can take place in these plants
Bio-fuel plants grown in parts of the waste land, for example, 11
million hectares, can yield a revenue of approximately Rs. 20,000
crore a year and provide employment to over 12 million people both
for plantation and running of the extraction plants. It will reduce the
foreign exchange outflow paid for importing crude oil, the cost of
which is continuously rising in the international market. The bio-fuel
is carbon neutral and emission free. The oil can also be used for soap
and in candle industries. De-oiled cake is a raw material for composting
and the plantation is also good for honey production. We should absorb
the best of the technologies available worldwide and start commercial
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 497
operation immediately. One time investment needed for bio-fuel
plantation to production in 11 million hectares will be approximately
Rs. 27,000 crores. The capital equipment and investment in plant
and machinery can come from bank loans and private sector
entrepreneurs. I have seen the progress in bio-fuel plant cultivation,
preparation of seedlings, tissue culture and development of non-toxic
hybrid varieties in Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore.
They have also worked from processing of seeds to bio-fuel production
by the indigenous design and development of bio-fuel plants. Anand
Agriculture University at Anand (Gujarat) has also made progress in
the bio-fuel cultivation and processing in Gujarat. Bio-fuel plants
can be grown in a number of States in the southern, western and central
parts of the country. The Patna University can prepare a plan for
Jatropha plantation in the wasteland available in various districts and
also evolve a scheme for creation of bio-fuel enterprises in the rural
areas in Bihar. I would recommend that use of chour land in Bihar
may be considered for Jatropha plantation. Now I would like to talk
Water harvesting should become mandatory for all. To improve
water table, we need to build check dams, develop water sheds, desilt
ponds and rivers, clear the inlets and outlets to the ponds and water
bodies and recharge the wells. If our rural areas are made to have the
operational water bodies, recharging of the wells will take place. The
task is totally labour intensive and nationwide implementation of this
scheme will provide employment for six million persons for more
than three or four years. The scheme will result in increase in storage
capacity of water bodies and create additional irrigation potential of
the land in the region and enhance agricultural productivity. This is
particularly applicable for Bihar to prevent flooding in certain low
lying areas. The next important area is wealth generation through fly
As you are aware, the use of coal for power generation results in
increased quantum of fly ash production, which has reached about
100 million tonnes per year. All-out efforts are needed to utilize this
fly ash not only from environmental considerations, but also to avoid
498 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
land usage for fly ash dumping. Though there has been a steady progress
in fly ash utilization from 1990, we have a long way to go to reach
the target of 100% fly ash utilization. It is reported that the agricultural
increase of grains is around 15%, green vegetables 35% and root
vegetables 50%, when fly ash is mixed with the soil. Toxicity tests
have proved that there is no toxic element due to fly ash. But it has
higher nutrients due to increased availability of iron and calcium.
The fly ash can become a wealth generator by making use of it for
producing "green building" materials, road, agriculture etc. Presently,
the fly ash utilization is in the range of 33 million tonnes per year and
providing employment for over 50,000 personnel. Full utilization of
the fly ash stock will provide employment potential for 300,000 people
and result in a business volume of over Rs. 4,000 crore. Since a number
of thermal power stations are in operation in Bihar, plenty of unused
fly ash is available in the State. The fly ash with certain processing
can be utilized by the farmers in the State for improving the soil
productivity in addition to its use in cement and green building industry.
The next topic I would like to discuss is Textile Industry.
Textile industry is very important for the Indian economy. Garment
export business is a low investment and large volume employment
generator. India is presently exporting six billion dollars worth of
garments, whereas with the WTO regime in place, we can increase
the production and export of garments to 18 to 20 billion dollars within
the next five years. This will enable generation of employment in
general and in rural areas in particular. By tripling the export of apparels,
we can add more than 5 million direct jobs and 7 million indirect
jobs in allied sectors, including cultivation of cotton. Concerted effort
is needed in cotton research, technology generation, transfer of
technology, modernization and upgrading of ginning and pressing
factories and aggressive marketing strategy. I would suggest Bihar
should undertake creation of a large number of apparel parks in the
rural areas in collaboration with garment exporters. This will provide
large scale entrepreneurial and employment opportunities to the rural
population. This employment, supported by agriculture, will increase
the earning capacity of the rural people of Bihar. Finally, I would
like to discuss about health care.
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 499
Another area, which is an employment generator, is the health
care industry. We have only one doctor for 1,800 people, whereas in
some of the developed countries the doctor to population ratio is 1:
600. For providing quality health care to all of our citizens, we would
need at least doubling the strength of doctors and paramedical staff
in the whole country. The investment for this need not necessarily
come from government alone. Hospitals can be set up by the private
sector with certain tax concessions and subsidized infrastructural
Setting up of 30,000 static tele-medicine stations distributed in
30,000 key locations, within the zone of 3 lakh villages and providing
20,000 mobile tele-medicine units will enable reaching of quality health
care closer to every home, which are connected to the district, state
government hospitals, corporate hospitals, and super specialty hospitals
in the country. This is possible as India has a network of satellite
How to reach health care to the large number of our population?
An innovative method has come into action in certain states. This
system provides free health cover to the citizens who are members
and pay Rs. 10 per individual per month as an insurance premium.
State and Central Governments can sponsor this insurance scheme
involving matching contribution of Rs. 10 per individual per month.
Such a cover should be able to provide treatment for all types of
diseases including expensive open heart surgery to the members of
the scheme. A consortium is required to be formed, in Bihar between
the Government, corporate hospitals and NGCfs for providing integrated
cost effective health care. The scheme when fully operational can
provide direct employment for additional 48,000 doctors and one lakh
paramedical staff in Bihar. Apart from providing health care to citizens,
these corporate hospitals can attract a large number of medical tourists
to the state in view of our competitiveness in treating complex diseases.
Bihar can definitely consider setting up of corporate hospitals in the
urban and rural areas backed up with the health care scheme which I
have suggested. Recently, when I was in Kerala I saw a high tech
hospital in a village called Parumala where facilities exist for treatment
500 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
of cardiac diseases, cancer, TB etc. Next topic I would like to cover
is small scale enterprises.
Presently the small scale sector in the country has 12 million
units employing around 28 million people. Bihar has certain core
competence in the areas of handloom, paper products, Madhubani
paintings, makhana, sugarcane, and pisciculture. Bihar also produces
guava, mango and leechi. These are fit candidates for agro-processing
industry, including intermediate cold storage sites. In some areas stone
cutting is a big industry. There is a need to produce value added
stones for the export market. In addition competence can also be
created in the areas of electrical, mechanical, chemical, computer
accessories, computer hardware and software. The creation of such
small scale industries in the region can provide employment for over
two million youth of the state.
Dear friends, I talked to you so far about Bihar's unique core
competence in various sectors and the necessity of building capacities
among students for undertaking nation building tasks through the
university education system. I have found that when the students
graduate approximately 10% of the students take up research or some
specialization. The remaining 90% graduates are looking for jobs
and they have to come out with the spirit "I can do it". The education
system should inspire the young to achieve this capacity. Graduates
with such a prepared mind can definitely be able to take up the leadership
of small enterprises with the assistance of venture capital provided
by banks. This will enable the nation to have a number of employment
generators rather than employment seekers. It is important for the
new Bihar to make appropriate changes to the university education
system which will empower the young people of Bihar to take up an
It is time that we all realized that crime does not pay; that corruption
does not pay. This only fragments the society and the economy becomes
directionless. What is needed is a total realization that the situation
can be retrieved and one could look to a bright future. But then it
needs a vision and a collective will that can be put into practice through
co-ordinated, purposeful and positive endeavours. It is time Bihar
EDUCATION, ART AND CULTURE 501
had a vision, "Bihar Vision: Developed State by 2015". We should
learn to look into the future, set objectives for the long run and eschew
all temporary, shortsighted and parochial tendencies and objectives.
The people of Bihar need to rise and be awake and I have no doubt
the rest of the nation will join them in such a noble task. This will be
possible if the people's welfare is put as the basic objective. Politically,
socially, economically and culturally, a co-ordinated, streamlined,
harmonious vision for the future need to be spelt out and worked for.
I would urge all of you to work for such an objective with a vision. In
this noble but mammoth task, the educated younger generation has a
crucial role to play and I have no doubt your concerted action will
bring back the glory to Bihar in all its sectors that it used to pride
I congratulate the graduates who are passing out from Patna
University today and my best wishes to the members of Patna University
for success in their mission of providing quality education to the youth

Hydrography and its Multidimensions
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the Golden Jubilee Celebrations
of the National Hydrographic Office. My greetings to all the officers
and staff of this office who have been working on executing the vital
task of systematically conducting hydrographic surveys, nautical charts
and maritime safety maps in the sea areas surrounding India. I have
been informed that over the years our entire coastline of around 7000
kms have been surveyed by the team of National Surveyors resulting
in the creation of valuable database. This includes a number of ports,
harbours, the island territories and their approaches. The nautical charts
and allied publications produced by NHO have been of immense use
in ensuring safe navigation at sea and also useful in the design of
offshore and coastal development projects.
As you are aware oceans are extremely important for the social,
political and economic development of a nation. Oceans possess living
and non-living resources. Poly-metallic nodules in deep waters, placer
deposits, heavy sands containing molybdenum and thorium, deposits
of phosphorites and calcite etc. are a few examples of non-living
resources. Efforts are being made to locate hydrocarbon resources in
deep waters. One of the important resources in the east and west coasts
is methane hydrate deposits, which are expected to be available at a
depth ranging from 400 - 700 metres below the seabed. Seismic studies
have shown high probability of existence of these deposits. At present
there is a National Gas Hydrates Programme, which is working in an
integrated mission to locate methane hydrate deposits. It is a complex
technological challenge as it involves high pressure technology
transportation. NHO can participate in this programme by providing
bathymetric or any mapping process and sound ranging support for
precise detection of the deposit areas.
Address at the Golden Jubilee Celebrations of National Hydrographic Office,
Dehradun, 1 June 2004
506 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Efficient management of ocean resources and conduct of trade
through sea route are wholly dependent on continued availability of
updated reliable hydrographic data. This is where accurate and detailed
nautical charts are important for economic development. Presently a
new type of demand for sea water is emerging through the establishment
of large scale desalination plants for meeting the drinking water shortage
of a few large cities of our country. Thus, I see a very important role
for NHO in promoting sustainable development both at the sea and
in our exclusive economic zone and along the ecologically fragile
coastal zone and island territories.
There are a few inhabited and large number of uninhabited islands
of India in the Bay of Bengal and Arabian Sea. There is a need to
continuously update our island boundaries and their dynamically
changing contents. These islands can be characterized into three types :
(1) Islands of strategic importance, (2) Islands of economic importance,
and (3) Bio-diversity islands; and any combination of the above three.
At this point, I would like to recall my own experience.
In October 1993, the development of Prithvi missile was almost
over. However, the Army desired to have a confirmatory test, on a
land range, to validate Circular Error Probability (CEP). Our efforts
to conduct the tests in our desert range could not take off due to range
safety problems. To overcome this we were looking for an uninhabited
island on the eastern coast. On the hydrographic map supplied by the
Navy, we saw a few islands in the Bay of Bengal off Dhamra (Orissa
coast) indicating that there was some landmass. Our range team
consisting of Dr. S.K. Salwan and Shri V.K. Saraswat hired a boat
from Dhamra and went in search of the island. On the map these
islands were marked as Tong wheeler', 'coconut wheeler' and 'small
wheeler'. The team carried a directional compass and proceeded on
the journey. They lost their way and could not locate the Wheeler
Island. Fortunately, they met a few fishing boats and asked them for
the route. The fishermen did not know about the Wheeler Island but
they said there was an Island called 'Chandrachood'. They thought
that this could be the Wheeler Island. They approximately gave the
direction for proceeding to Chandrachood. With this help the team
could reach the Chandrachood Island, which was later confirmed as
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 507
Small Wheeler Island. By this time it was late in the evening and it
The boatman refused to move in the night and the team had to
stay in the Small Wheeler Island in the boat for the night. Next morning
the team came back to Dhamra. On physical survey of the three Islands
it was found that the Long Wheeler Island had eroded over a period
of time and was not useful for range activities. In view of this we
chose Small Wheeler, which had adequate width and length required
for range operations. The team also found some signs of boats from
other countries visiting the Small Wheeler Island. A study of the
hydrographic data a of number of years indicated the erosion
characteristic of the island. After taking over the islands from the
Orissa Government for range activities, we created permanent bunds
on the periphery of the selected island to prevent future erosion. This
one tiny island has transformed into a world class missile range complex.
Hence, every island of ours needs periodical survey and based on
this survey, we have to protect our islands.
The survey of islands of economic importance should lead to
the development of certain islands for promoting tourism. Once the
tourism potential is established, it would need development of the
tourist infrastructure to enable functioning as a wealth generator for
the nation. Also there will be a need for advising the tourism department
on perimeter protection of these islands to ensure prevention of erosion
leading to sustainable tourism development. This we have done in
the Wheeler Island complex, otherwise the useful area would have
There are certain small islands which have inherent biodiversity
potential that have to be further developed. These islands must be
separately surveyed and the soil characteristics should be established
for their suitability of developing certain species of herbs and medicinal
plants. The biodiversity parks could be specifically used for growing
the rare herbal species of Indian origin. These parks can also be
developed for ecological and tourist importance. A unique forest can
be developed in uninhabited islands. For example, the Andaman Fadauk
wood is well known as a structural material. I used it for the propellers
508 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
of hovercraft. Constant updation of hydrographic data by NHO is
essential for preserving the flora and fauna of the islands.
I am delighted to know that the contribution of NHO has increased
fourfold during the last 50 years in the area of sea mapping and other
tasks. This has been achieved through the use of state-of-the-art
surveying system such as multi-beam swath eco-sounder, digital site
scan sonar, differential global positioning systems, utilization of aerial
photographs and satellite imagery and transition from manual to digital
Some of the notable achievements in shipping, port and water
way development include the survey, demonstration and charting of
the deep water route in the Gulf of Kutch enabling movement of crude
oil petroleum products vessel from multiple Indian ports. Also, you
have contributed in the establishment of nine sea ports through your
hydrographic survey, and many more you will contribute in the years
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS)
was enacted in 1994 and it was ratified by India in June 1995. This
has resulted in the addition of 2 million square kilometres of sea area
to our national jurisdiction in the form of exclusive economic zone
with full rights for economic exploitation. For claiming this additional
area NHO has made important contribution in the form of providing
survey data. There is a need to frame rules for governance and regulation
of the development activities within the maritime zones of India
consistent with national security needs. We have to map our maritime
zones with its living and non-living resources as a first step towards
sustained economic development in the sea areas. Department of Ocean
Development, Surveyor General of India and NHO may have to work
together in evolving a national plan for implementing this economic
Accidents at sea could have devastating impact on the environment
cutting across national frontiers and national economy. Navigational
safety at sea therefore calls for international co-operation for its success.
At the grass-roots level this implies easy availability of authentic
hydrographic data products and services to all mariners and other
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 509
users of this data. Hence, for protecting our territory and its surrounding
environment we should ensure collection and dissemination of reliable
hydrographic data in our own sea areas and also our maritime
neighbourhood. Such hydrographic co-operation can be achieved only
through Government-to-Government level pro-active measures.
One major problem in the sea is the oil slick caused due to spillage
from tankers and ship accidents. The slick can cause substantial damage
to the living and non-living wealth of the seas. The Hydrographic
Office should carry out periodic survey of the ocean to determine the
existence of slick on and under the surface. This information should
be provided to marine biologists for selecting and administering oil
eating or oil degrading microbes having particular affinity for consuming
hydrocarbon based products. This is essential for conserving the living
and non-living resources of our seas.
I am happy to note that the National Hydrographic Office has
assimilated the new hydrographic technologies and techniques. They
have constantly trained the personnel and kept them updated with the
latest knowledge in the field. This has enabled the department to meet
the variety of demands of maritime development of our nation. To
further enhance the technological capabilities, NHO may undertake
measurement of direct acoustic parameters such as acoustic transmission
loss and ambient noise reverberation in addition to the measurement
of ocean depth, type of sea bottom, temperature and salinity.
Simultaneously we should also enhance our hydrographic co-operation
in the region between the littoral States by exchanging hydrographic
information so that a data-base of various countries on seas is generated
as part of international co-operation on the sea route and sea safety.
The future vision for NHO lies in establishing multi-capability
Indian Navy Surveying Ships for wider development role, innovation
in surveying procedure based on the new generation census, five-
yearly update surveys for ports approaches and ecologically sensitive
areas and supply of updated editions of digital navigation charts using
print on demand technology through online marketing.
Today, expertise, infrastructure and data collection platforms are
widely distributed under different organizations such as National
510 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Institute of Oceanography (NIO), Geological survey of India (GSI),
National Institute of Ocean technology (NIOT), Fisheries Survey of
India, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation, Naval Physical and
Oceanographic Laboratory etc. There is a need to have an integrated
approach among all participating organizations to promote ocean safety
and ocean development. NHO can play an important role in achieving
this due to its long-standing experience in the area and international
exposure. This will enable cost-effective quality data collection and
dissemination with minimum infrastructure.
When I was talking to sea port authorities, I was told that large
ships above 1 lakh tonne capacity do not visit Indian ports due to
lower draught (12 to 14 metres), whereas these ships need 18 to 22
metres draught. I was told, Singapore and Colombo have this natural
draught availability and through hydrographic survey, they maintain
this draught availability continuously by suitable dredging. I find that
for the available 7000 kms of coast line, we do not have deeper draught
availability conditions in any of our ports. I would like NHO to consider
this as a national task and locate an area where such draught in our
coast line is available or can be made available for berthing high
tonnage capacity ships, which could be a large wealth generator for
On the occasion of Golden Jubilee celebrations, I wish the members
of National Hydrographic Office community success in all their future
Aim Great Missions, Work for Them
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in the twenty-first Convocation
of the Sambalpur University. When I am in Sambalpur I realize I
am in the land of the renowned freedom fighter Surendra Sai of western
Orissa. Of course based on the selfless services of many leaders from
1857 to 1947 we got our independence and now we are on a mission
of transforming India into a prosperous, happy and safe nation.
Sambalpur University was established with the mission of
providing higher education to the tribal and socially and economically
backward students from western Orissa. I am happy to know that in
the last two decades, the enrolment of students from weaker section
of the society has increased to 25% of the total student strength. Since
I am in the academic ambience with teachers and students I would
like to share my experience with a unique teacher whom I met in my
early phase of life which really changed my mission in life.
I worked in Delhi with the Ministry of Defence. Later I joined
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) in 1958
at Aeronautical Development Establishment in Bangalore (Bangaluru).
There, I took up the development of Hovercraft. Hovercraft design
needed the development of a ducted contra-rotating propeller for creating
a smooth flow balancing the torques. I did not know how to design a
contra-rotating propeller though I knew how to design a conventional
propeller. Some of my friends told me that I could approach Prof.
Satish Dhawan of Indian Institute of Science, who was well known
for his aeronautical research, for help in designing the ducted contra
I took permission from my Director Dr. Mediratta and went to
Prof. Satish Dhawan who was sitting in a small room in Indian Institute
Address at the 21 st Convocation of Sambalpur University, Sambalpur, 4 June 2004
512 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
of Science with lots of books in the background and a blackboard on
the wall. Prof. Satish Dhawan asked me what was the problem that I
would like to discuss. I explained the problem to Prof. Dhawan about
my project work. He told me that it is really a challenging task and he
would teach me the design if I attend his classes in IISc between
2.00 p.m. to 3.00 p.m. on all Saturdays for the next six weeks. He
was a visionary teacher. He prepared the schedule for the entire course
and wrote it on the black board. He also gave me the reference material
and books I should read before I start attending the course. I considered
this as a great opportunity and I started attending the discussion and
started meeting him regularly. Before commencing each meeting, he
would ask critical questions and assess my understanding of the subject.
That was for the first time that I realized how a good teacher prepares
himself for teaching with meticulous planning and prepares the student
for acquisition of knowledge. This process continued for the next six
weeks. I got the capability for designing the contra-rotating propeller.
Prof. Dhawan told me that I am ready for developing the contra-rotating
propeller for a given hovercraft configuration. That was the time I
realized that Prof. Satish Dhawan was not only a teacher but also a
fantastic development engineer of aeronautical systems.
Later during the critical phases of testing Professor Dhawan was
with me to witness the test and found solutions to the problems. After
reaching the smooth test phase, contra-rotating propeller went through
50 hours of continuous testing. Prof. Satish Dhawan witnessed the
test himself and congratulated me. That was a great day for me when
I saw the contra-rotating propeller designed by my team performing
to the mission requirement in the hovercraft. However, at that time, I
did not realize that Prof. Satish Dhawan would become the Chairman
of Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and that I would get
the opportunity to work with him as a Project Director in the
development of first satellite launch vehicle SLV-3 for injecting the
Rohini Satellite into the orbit. Nature has its own way to link the
student's dream and the real life later.
Design of contra-rotating propeller was the first project in my
career which gave me the confidence to design many complex aerospace
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 513
systems in future. The hovercraft could fly just above the ground
level carrying two passengers. I was the first pilot for this hovercraft
and I could control and manoeuvre the vehicle in any direction. Through
this project I learnt the techniques of designing and developing the
contra-rotating propeller. Above all, 1 learnt that in a project, problems
will always crop up; we should not allow problems to be our masters
but we should defeat the problems. The lessons that I learnt from
Prof. Satish Dhawan for the next four decades are: the importance of
design capability and the need for indomitable spirit. Let me pray for
you, all the young, to gain the experience what I experienced.
When I see you all in this campus during this Convocation, I
realize the importance of employment generation. There has been
substantial growth in our educational system and we are generating
over 3 million graduates every year and another 7 million educated
upto 10 or 10+2 level. However, our employment generation system
is not in a position to absorb the graduates passing out from the
universities leading to increase in educated unemployed, year after
year. This situation will lead to instability in the social structure. We
need education integrated with an entrepreneurial spirit. A multi pronged
strategy is needed to make education more attractive and simultaneously
create employment potential - how do we do that?
Firstly, the educational system should highlight the importance
of entrepreneurship and prepare the students right from the school
and college education to get oriented towards setting up of the enterprises
which will provide them creativity, freedom and ability to generate
wealth. Apart from entrepreneurship, the youth should have the spirit
that "we can do it". Secondly, the banking system should provide
venture capital right from every village level to the prospective
entrepreneurs for undertaking new enterprises. Banks have to be
proactive to support the innovative products for enabling wealth
generation by young entrepreneurs by setting aside the "conventional
tangible asset syndrome". Definitely this involves a certain amount
of calculated risk which can be eliminated by making an analysis of
successful venture capital enterprises. Thirdly, there is a need to identify
marketable products and enhancement of purchasing power among
514 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
the people. This can come through the implementation of mega
programmes such as rural prosperity through connectivity (RUPCON),
Interlinking of Rivers, Infrastructure missions, Power missions and
The universities should become a facilitator for creating this
entrepreneurship scheme through the support of the banking system
and the marketing system. This is one way of reducing the employment
gap leading to upliftment of the 260 million people living below the
I was working in India's missile programme during 1982 to 1999.
Even though my place of work was Hyderabad, my theatre of action
was always Chandipur and Wheeler Islands of Orissa coast where
the developed missiles were flight tested. I would like to narrate an
interesting experience which happened during that period.
In October 1993, the development of Prithvi missile was almost
over. However, the Army desired to have a confirmatory test, on a
land range, to validate the Circular Error Probability (CEP) of the
missile. Our efforts to conduct the tests in our desert range could not
take off due to range safety problems. To overcome this we were
looking for an uninhabited island on the eastern coast. On the
hydrographic map supplied by the Navy, we saw a few islands in the
Bay of Bengal off Dhamra (Orissa coast) indicating that there was
some landmass. Our range team consisting of Dr. S.K. Salwan and
Shri V.K. Saraswat hired a boat from Dhamra and went in search of
the island. On the map these islands were marked as 'long wheeler',
'coconut wheeler' and 'small wheeler'. The team carried a directional
compass and proceeded on the journey. They lost their way and could
not locate the Wheeler Island. Fortunately, they met a few fishing
boats and asked them for the route. The fishermen did not know about
the Wheeler Island but they said there was an Island called
'Chandrachood'. They thought that this could be the Wheeler Island.
They approximately gave the direction for proceeding to Chandrachood.
With this help the team could reach the Chandrachood Island, which
was later confirmed as Small Wheeler Island. By this time it was late
in the evening and it was dark.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 515
The boatman refused to move in the night and the team had to
stay in the Small Wheeler Island in the boat for the night counting
the stars. Next morning the team came back to Dhamra. On physical
survey of the three Islands it was found that the Long Wheeler Island
had eroded over a period of time and was not useful for range activities.
In view of this we chose Small Wheeler, which had adequate width
and length required for range operations. The team also found some
signs of boats from other countries visiting the Small Wheeler Isl and.
A study of the hydrographic data of a number of years indicated the
erosion characteristic of the island. After taking over the islands from
the Orissa Government for range activities, we created permanent
stony bunds on the periphery of the selected islands to prevent future
erosion. This one tiny island has been transformed into a world class
missile range complex. Dear friends, what we leam from this experience
is: aim great missions, work for them and you will achieve.
Western Orissa is bestowed with rich tropical forest resource
and it is the storehouse of medicinal plants in the Gandhamardan hill
areas. Also I understand that Sambalpur University has a well equipped
life science department and many others. A nation's strength
predominantly resides in its natural and human resources. In natural
resources, India is endowed with a vast coast-line with marine resources.
India ranks among the top few nations having a rich bio-diversity.
Particularly, in the herbal area there are potential applications for
developing multiple products for nutrition, prevention and cure of
diseases. There are tremendous opportunities for growth in global
market of herbal products. India has similar potential for promoting
floriculture and aquaculture in a big way. India is rich in herbs, germ
plasm and micro organisms. Industrially developed countries are
importing these bio-resources in the raw forms and add value to them
for export to developing countries including India as special seeds,
medicines and bio-materials, fully protecting patents of these products.
Instead of allowing export of such resources and importing value added
products at high cost, India must add its own technology for conversion
of such resources into value added products for domestic requirement
and also for export. Use of IT for commercialization and marketing
can increase our outreach and speed enormously. Ancient knowledge
516 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
is a unique resource of India, for it has the treasure of more than 5000
years of civilization. In Rashtrapati Bhavan a herbal garden has been
developed with 32 varieties of plants particularly Geranium, Sadabahar
and Sarpagandha, which attracts a large number of young researchers,
farmers, small scale entrepreneurs, industrialists and students.
I will be inaugurating a herbal garden in this university campus
and I am sure this garden will lead to the growth of many new varieties
of herbal plants. This will also enable the university to build capability
of converting plant extract to drug in partnership with research
laboratories and the drug industry.
I have discussed with you my experiences with a design teacher,
employment generation through entrepreneurship, an island
transforming into a launch complex and wealth generation through
bio-diversity. These experiences emphasise the importance of
indomitable spirit in realizing any mission leading to progress of
Development is dynamic; it is a vibrant continuum; it is a multi
faceted phenomenon. It is essential to grasp the real concept of
development to ensure holistic growth and full realization of goals.
As we move towards the development of Orissa with economic strength,
competitiveness, knowledge power and technology, productivity needs,
effective governance and empowered management, we also need
invisible leadership. Invisible leaders are those whose leadership styles
move from commander to coach, manager to mentor, from director
to delegator and from one who demands respect to one who facilitates
self respect. 1 would recommend to Sambalpur University to create
such leaders who will shape Orissa into one of the leaders in economic
Technology for Societal Transformation
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in the Technology Day awards
function 2004 organized by Ministry of Science and Technology.
My greetings to all the award winners, organizers, members of the
Technology Development Board of Department of Science and
Technology, distinguished guests and other teams.
During my periodical address over AIR, on Technology Day -
11 May 2004, I narrated the milestones and the progress India has
achieved technologically in the year 2003-2004. It may be relevant
to you. We had received hundreds of inputs from our technological
community across the nation in various disciplines. For brevity, I
had discussed nine technological events, which had the potential to
penetrate into our economy and assist the transformation of our society.
They were: Seed Cotton Productivity; Electricity Generation from
Municipal Waste; A Brand in Automobile Technology; Fast Breeder
Reactor; Birth of an Indian Cryogenic Engine; Light Combat Aircraft
(LCA) - TEJAS crossing the Sonic Bander; Mapping the Neighbourhood
by the Children; Synergy Mission for Environmental Upgradation
and Digital Library in every Panchayat. You may get the details from
Today I would like to focus on the technological challenges which
will enable faster transformation of India into a developed nation.
What should be our essential need? How to channellize our energies?
How to make use of our core competence, the human resource and
physical resource to the national advantage?
The national developmental challenges are many involving
integrated action namely: agriculture and food processing, education
and health care, information and communication technology,
Address at The Technology Day Award Function, Pragati Maidan, New Delhi,
518 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
infrastructure and self-reliance in critical technologies. As technologists,
you can contribute in many areas like education, health care, disaster
prevention and mitigation, e-governance, urban planning, rural
communication, PURA (Providing Urban Amenities in Rural Areas)
and importantly interlinking of rivers. It depends on the integrated
application of one technology with other or in combination of multiple
technologies such as biotechnology, information technology, space
technology, and nano-technology for innovative missions that must
address pro-actively acute problems of rapid depletion of conventional
energy sources, drinking water supplies, and deliver solutions for the
man-planet conflict that has led to pollution, climatic change and
degradation of ecology and the environment. Hence I am going to
discuss with you about the connectivities, which are important in
bringing prosperity to rural India, the foundation of our society.
As you are aware, nearly 700 million people of India live in the
rural areas in 600,000 villages. Connectivity of village complexes
providing economic opportunities to all segments of people is an urgent
need to bridge the rural-urban divide, generate employment and enhance
The integrated methods, which will bring prosperity to rural India
are: the physical connectivity of the village clusters through quality
roads and transport; electronic connectivity through tele-communication
with high bandwidth fibre optic cables reaching the rural areas from
urban cities and through internet kiosks; knowledge connectivity through
education, vocational training for farmers, artisans and craftsmen and
entrepreneurship programmes; and economic connectivity through
starting of grass-roots level innovation-driven enterprises and self-
help groups with the partnership of banks, micro credits for marketing
the cost-effective products for improving productivity and mass
To prevent migration of workforce from rural to urban areas,
enriching the rural life and employment generation in rural areas are
essential. Teaching entrepreneurship in educational institutions and
providing necessary opportunities for sustainable self-employment
backed with investment, technology will be an employment generator.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 519
The integrated chain of connectivities (physical, electronic, knowledge
resulting into economic) in a time bound manner along with venture
capital funding will generate economic development with large scale
employment potential leading to rural prosperity. I would like to discuss
two examples - tele-education and seawater desalination, where
technology infusion is needed.
When we provide electronic connectivity to the rural areas with
the broadband, satellite and wireless connectivities for last mile access,
it paves the way for knowledge enablement to the rural people via
tele-education. Through this, we can take the knowledge to their
doorsteps with the latest innovations, digital library, experiences in
value-addition, state-of-the-art practices, system oriented approach,
entrepreneurial management skills, technical skills, business knowledge
with the help of Universities, R&D organizations, industries,
management and technical institutions. It also provides a backbone
for the schools where adequate number of quality teachers is not
available. Tele-education will enable the teachings of the good teacher
available to the remote comers of the nation in a two-way tele-education
mode. A good teacher from remote rural area also can teach seamlessly
from the remote location to the other parts of the country. The present
systems available do not provide these facilities in full and are expensive.
The infusion of technology is needed to make these systems affordable
for every one of our panchayat and our villages, so that the knowledge
can reach the common man in all the corners of the nation. We are
advancing in this direction. I would like to give my recent personal
experiences. Rashtrapati Bhavan was connected to Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, USA through Internet and voice over IP (Internet
Protocol) in a low bandwidth configuration. I had an interactive
conference with the scientists of CMU on "Digital library for every
panchayat in India". Also, during this week, I interacted with the
scientists from NASA and India attending the Indo-US space congress,
at Bangalore from Rashtrapati Bhavan using VS AT. Both these
technologies - the satellite based and Internet based, are complementary
to each other and are needed for tele-education. Satellite communication
provides one to many connections with easy scalability to even a
billion people. The Internet-based technology is a connectionless
520 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
network and because of its use of IP, it is amenable even for
communicating with small form factor mobile devices. These are good
for one to a few interactive interactions. When we talk about remote
education, we need to have a combination of intense interaction between
the students and the teachers but when it comes to delivery of lectures,
technologies for communication of one to many should be made cost-
effective and affordable. We should also create quality content so
that our entire education can be remotely accessible and can work
seamlessly with our collegiate and school education. These systems
with certain additional medical instrumentation should provide tele
medicine and even health awareness facility also. Tele-medicine
connects urban hospitals, district hospitals to the Primary Health Centres
in the rural areas.
Globally, there are a few solutions to solve water shortage. I
would like to give certain suggestions; definitely it may be of interest
to you. The first solution is by redistribution of water. India has already
started this by widespread promotion of rain water harvesting in both
rural and urban areas, but it has to be done in a mission mode as a few
states are already doing. In addition we need to put a stop to large-
scale wastage of water and promote water recycling on compulsory
basis in urban and rural areas. It is essential to note that we get monsoon
rain only for three months in most of the places, whereas the consumption
is for all 365 days using the ground water. The other major programme,
which is under the consideration of the Government, is the linking of
rivers, which also needs multiple technological inputs.
Fortunately, we have a resource of 91% of water in the form of
oceans and seas. Therefore, the second solution would be to create
new perennial sources of fresh water by seawater desalination. There
are many desalination plants already established all over the world.
Every year in our country, the drought or flood conditions are
experienced damaging the habitat and certain human loss. We resort
to partial solutions with large amount of expenditure. Presently in
India there is certain water management for irrigation purposes useful
for food production. The demand for food may get doubled in two
decades. Therefore the planning of water through desalination process
and interlinking of rivers has to be planned together in the development
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 521
of additional water resources for irrigation and potable water for
India attaches importance to technological solutions for various
desalination processes. Fortunately Department of Atomic Energy,
DRDO, CSIR, IIT Madras and academic institutions are working in
different processes for desalination, whereas we should recognize that
there are already operational plants elsewhere in the world. Nuclear
Desalination Demonstration Project (NDDP) at Kalpakkam has
demonstrated the safe and economic production of good quality water
by desalination of seawater comprising of 4500 cubic metre per day
by Multi Stage Flash (MSF) and 1800 cubic metre per day by Reverse
Osmosis (RO) plant. The plants can be scaled up many times. The
design of the hybrid MSF-RO plant to be set up at an existing nuclear
power station is another solution. The MSF plant based on long tube
design requires lesser energy. The effect on performance of MSF plant
due to higher seawater intake temperature is marginal. The preheat
RO system part of the hybrid plant uses reject cooling seawater from
MSF plant. This allows lower pressure operation, resulting in energy
saving. The two qualities of water produced are usable for the power
station as well as for drinking purposes with appropriate blending.
The post treatment is also simplified due to blending of the products
from MSF and RO plants. Another approach is the use of dual-purpose
plants, where the desalination plant is connected to an electricity plant,
utilizing the waste heat from the electricity plants run by nuclear energy.
I understand, under favourable conditions, dual-purpose plants decrease
the cost of desalinated water below those of conventional desalination
methods, primarily through energy conservation.
Last year, I visited the Umm A1 Nar desalination plant in Abu
Dhabi, which produces nearly 500 million litres of fresh water per
day using the MSF (Multi Stage Flash) process. This one plant has
totally transformed the ecology of the desert, and is an example of
how large scale water supplies may be obtained from the oceans. In
this process the seawater has to be flashed into steam by heayaddition
at low pressure. When the steam is condensed to produce fr^sh water,
part of the energy is used to run steam turbines to produce electricity
to feed back to the grid.
522 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
But for India we need new processes and new solutions like use
of reverse osmosis using solar energy and MSF using nuclear energy.
It is also essential to set up the desalination plants next to the nuclear
power stations to reuse the waste energy effectively. The technologists
and industrialists who have assembled here should come out with
unique technological solution to produce water for drinking and
irrigation through seawater desalination process in a cost effective
Now I would like to discuss how innovation could be nurtured
through the infusion of technology and the need for instituting of a
special award by Technology Development Board.
In the Ministry of Science and Technology there are two major
schemes, which I am personally aware of. Technology Development
Board, which leads to commercialization of technologies, developed
by lab/industry, and also we are witnessing today, technology awards
are given to recognize the excellence. The same Ministry has another
important scheme through National Innovation Foundation tasked with
the mission of bringing out and growing national grass roots
technological innovations and traditional knowledge. They give awards
to a few grass roots innovations, which are selected from thousands
of proposals. Some of the innovations for which awards have been
given in the past years are: Low cost hand pump, Coconut harvester,
Portable power generating device, Convertible three wheel tractor,
Self propelled weeder etc. But very rarely, these innovations are
converted into a commercial proposition having a societal impact.
The Technology Development Board may consider introducing from
the year 2005, at least two awards exclusively for shaping the innovation
into a globally competitive commercial application through
technological value addition with appropriate funding mechanism.
This may need nurturing of two thousand innovations to select two.
Now I would like to discuss with you the law of development, which
brings out the need for competitiveness in our products.
How to become competitive? I was studying the development
patterns and the dynamics of connectivity between nations, especially
in trade and business. As you all know, the world has a few developed
countries and many developing countries. What is the dynamics between
them and what connects them? Developed country has to market its
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 523
products in a competitive way to different countries to remain as
developed country. The developing country to get transformed into
developed country too has to market its products in other countries in
a competitive way. Competitiveness has three dimensions: quality of
the product, cost effectiveness and supply on time. Indeed this dynamics
of competitiveness in marketing of products by developing and
developed countries determines the law of development. We have to
see our integrated missions for national development with
competitiveness index in mind.
I have worked in many technological areas and management
groups, and based on certain experiences, I have evolved a definition
Technology as integration of multiple proven scientific
results and put to use for national development and
Technology can also be defined as maturity of scientific
discovery to result in multiple applications.
Of course there is a time difference between innovation and
commercialization. In electronics and communication systems it takes
less than five years for invention to become an application/product
and about ten years for material and manufacturing fields.
Technology is a non-linear tool that can effect the most
fundamental changes in the ground rules of economic
Science is linked to technology through applications.
Technology is linked to economy and environment
Economy and environment link technology to society.
The integrated relationship of science, technology, and
environment, manufacturing and marketing has tremendous impact
on the society. I congratulate all the awardees and greet the organizers
Wish you success in your mission of promoting technology for
Wockhardt in the Field of Biotechnology
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of Wockhardt
Biotech Park. My greetings to the organizers, pharmaceutical
technologists, chemists, doctors, academicians, other participants and
distinguished guests. Recombinant biotechnology is indeed a very
important route in realizing the bio-pharmaceuticals. I am happy to
know Wockhardt has specialized in this area through research and
also has developed and produced many drugs of importance.
The three products: Biovac-B, Wepox and Wosulin produced
and marketed by Wockhardt are indeed competitive in the pharma
market. I am sure that Wockhardt will keep pace with biotechnology
research and also participate in the convergence of biotechnology,
information technology and nanotechnologies.
Now we have seen the biotechnology wave following the IT wave
that we have experienced earlier. Realizing the importance of this,
many institutions in India have built biotechnology parks. We are
also seeing a large number of start-up companies - much the same
way as we had seen during the IT revolution. In a decade from now,
the biotechnology would form a very significant part of our economy -
both domestic and export economy. We have already started seeing
the convergence of biotechnology and nanotechnology as well as
biotechnology and information technology.
Now we believe nanotechnology is the new technology that is
knocking at our doors. It has wider applications compared to information
technology. It will be the central focus for many technologies to converge
and open a large number of applications. Further, this technology
will have a large domestic market potential leading to a robust economy.
Nano-biomedical sensors will play a major role in glucose detection
Address at the Inauguration of Wockhardt Biotech Park, Aurangabad, 23 September

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 525
and endoscopic implants. Drug delivery system will revolutionize
the health care to a large extent.
Recently I met Prof. Vijav K Varadan of Pennsylvania State
University, US. He shared his experience on the possible line of
treatment for Parkinson's disease and Epilepsy. The primary symptoms
in Parkinson's disease as you all are aware are tremor or trembling in
hands, arms, legs, jaw, and face, rigidity or stiffness of the limbs,
slowness of movement and impaired balance. Prof. Varadan has devised
a wireless system for monitoring and control of Parkinson's disease.
The system consists of an implantable DNA insert in the head region
for generating a pulse to the nerve system; controlled either by a modified
pacemaker or smart hat. Passive polymer-based gyro sensor is implanted
in the tremor location, the sensor gets the power from the Pacemaker
and the Pacemaker then reads the tremor motion. The Pacemaker then
generates the pulse in the implanted device in the head to control the
tremor. This appears to be a promising line of treatment for such
diseases. Prof. Varadan also has reported that a few patients affected
by Parkinson 's disease had a full recovery. This is the promising area
of research in which many of our Indian pharmaceutical companies
In India many R&D organizations and pharma industries discover
the molecules, and most of the pharmaceutical molecules are sold to
multinationals abroad. The benefit of value addition goes to the foreign
companies. The pharmaceutical business in the WTO environment
will have to be competitive. Competitiveness springs from technological
strength. The research and drug design, development and acceptance
for introduction are indeed a big mission. Particularly pharmaceutical
manufacturers need to prepare themselves for the challenges - design
to drug development, production and marketing. I am happy to see,
similar work is being done in this biotechnology park.
We are now fast moving into the world of Intellectual Property
Rights and Patents under the new international regimes which are
unfolding before us. To make sure that we do not lose out to any of
the IPR issues, it will be necessary to properly document all our research
work and to put in our claims for patents whenever we feel it worthwhile
526 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
to do so. Wockhardt scientists in collaboration with NIPER, certain
CSIR Labs and other institutions should become the repository of
IPR-related activities not only to ensure that we protect our Intellectual
Property of the modern times, but also to ensure that our repository
of traditional medicinal knowledge is properly documented and can
be put to strategic use to prevent IPR piracy.
Indian pharmaceutical industry is worth $ US 4 billion retail
sales in domestic market, in addition to US $ 2.6 billion in exports.
Export growth is due to export of new molecules (generic), especially
to regulated markets. Through molecule exports we are only helping
the developed countries for value addition. As reported in SCRIP
WORLD PHARMACEUTICAL NEWS UK, India ranks 4th in the
world accounting for 8% of world's drug production by volume and
1.5% by value. It ranks 17th in terms of export value of bulk actives
and dosage forms. Indian exports are sent to more than 200 countries
around the globe including highly regulated markets of US, Europe,
Japan and Australia. The larger pharma units number around 200 in
addition to 8000 Small and Medium Enterprises (EMEs) during 2003-
04, and value of bulk drugs (Rs 70 billion) and dosage forms produced
(Rs 275 billion) has grown by 15%.
With the adequate infrastructure and production set-up, the prices
of Indian medicines should be competitive in the world market. A
number of buyers from developed markets from North America and
Europe regularly source APIs (Associated Pharmaceutical Intermediate)
and drug intermediates from India. Many Indian companies maintain
highest standards in international 'SHE' requirements namely Safety,
Health and Environmental Protection in production.
Due to the Government policy initiatives for strengthening research
and development in pharma sector by way of fiscal incentives and
other steps to strengthen regulatory mechanism, new R&D set-ups
with infrastructure are coming up in various regions of the country.
Compared to the reported average R&D spending of 2% of turnover
in the sector, a few leading Indian pharma companies have increased
their R&D spending to over 5% of their turnover, which is a noteworthy
achievement. Results of the R&D, manufacturing of drugs with high
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 527
quality cost effectiveness and availability world over and higher market
penetration should enable India to become the first in production from
the present fourth place in the world.
A study by the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) states that
India has an opportunity of launching new drugs developed by the
Indian scientists. Such a drug could be developed at a cost of only
$100 million, one tenth the international norm, because of the high
intellectual capital of the Indian scientist coupled with low cost of
production. Also India's huge population and the prevalence of wide
spectrum of disease conditions offers a wide patients resource for
clinical trials. The clinical trial cost in India could be as low as $25
million compared to $300 to 350 million in the US.
The investigational new drug stage in India is one tenth the level
in America. The negative factors are that the Indian companies will
have to face growing competitive pressures from the local operation
of western multinationals. Some of these companies would develop
tactics such as authorized generics to limit the growth potential of
Indian companies. There is also a fear of patent challenges. If our
industry can cope with these problems I am sure pharma industry can
definitely be a great wealth generator for the nation.
Whether India has to eradicate leprosy or TB, to prevent spread
of HIV by developing anti HIV vaccine, or to control cardio vascular
diseases by multiple technologies and practices, we in India need
something important apart from resources. That is creative leadership
in all fields, particularly in medical field. Who are the creative leaders?
What are the qualities of a creative leader? The creative leadership is
exercising the task to change the traditional role from commander to
coach, from manager to mentor, from director to delegator and from
one who demands respect to one who facilitates self respect. The
higher the proportion of creative leaders in the medical field, the higher
the potential for successes in diagnosis, treatment and research for
discovering new avenues in health care.
I inaugurate the Wockhardt Bio-technology Park and wish all
success in your mission of producing and marketing cost-effective
quality drugs in the national and international market.
Energy Conservation Solutions to Industry
T AM HAPPY to address the International Conference on Energy
Conservation here today. I greet the organizers, energy experts,
academicians, industrialists, municipal authorities, building experts,
participants and distinguished guests.
When 1 am in the midst of energy management specialists, I
would like to share with you two experiences. The first one is regarding
use of solar energy for cost-effective heating at Brahmakumaris
Shantivan Complex, Mount Abu and the second one is related to use
of Nanotechnology for producing energy-efficient and cost-effective
LEDs (Light Emitting Diodes).
Solar cooking is one of the important applications in the field of
renewable energy. During the last 20 years many designs and concepts
have been developed and tested in the field of family cooking in the
form of box type solar cookers. Now new technology has come to
complement the box cookers. With this new technology it is possible
to cook for a larger number of persons using solar energy within a
short span of time. Prajapita Brahmakumaris Iswariya Vishwa Vidyalaya
has become one of the institutions, who have manufactured in their
own workshop at their premises and installed a large solar steam cooking
system at their headquarters Shantivan Complex, Abu Road, Rajasthan.
The system is designed for cooking 2000 meals twice daily based on
the certain technological collaboration. Typical power generated is
one mega watt hour per day. I am citing this example to suggest to
you the necessity for making such systems in all our big apartments,
hotels and industrial complexes, which can substantially reduce the
energy, cost and also minimize the pollution created by using other
forms of energy sources.
Address at the International Conference on Energy Conservation, Ahmedabad,
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 529
Dr. R.N. Bhargava, a Nanotechnologist from USA came and met
me at the Rashtrapati Bhavan. He demonstrated to me a very optimal
and efficient lighting system based on Nano crystals. The recent
advances in semiconductor-based lighting chips - Light Emitting Diodes
(LED) can provide six hours of reliable light to every home or shop
in a village at virtually no recurring energy cost and minimum installation
cost. These LEDs require a tiny fraction of energy used for other
forms of lighting. LED-based lighting can be easily provided with
solar panels or foot pedal generators. For nearly 40 years LEDs were
weak color light sources (Green, Amber and Red) used mostly as
indicators and numeric light. LED technology in recent years has
improved dramatically. Today LEDs, using 10 watt of power could
produce light equivalent to a sixty-watt filament lamp. Filament lamps
are highly inefficient since 90% of the energy is dissipated as heat.
Fluorescent lamps are more efficient but still waste energy by heating
gases, whereas LEDs convert energy to light very efficiently. Typical
LED lamps burn over 10 years or longer, they withstand much greater
temperature changes, mechanical vibrations and shock. They are reliable
and fade away slowly and there is no sudden stoppage of light. New
discoveries in nanotechnology make LEDs much brighter and make
the products less expensive, which can revolutionize rural electrification
for lighting. The field is fertile for research and development of high
efficient and low cost LEDs, using Nano-Crystal.
Let us now address energy conservation issues pertaining to
buildings and related services. Energy is required while constructing
the buildings and subsequently for their maintenance in the form of
providing lighting, maintaining a desired particular temperature,
provision of essential services such as water, drainage system, heating,
cooking etc. The building design has to take into account both these
aspects so that construction cost of the building can be low and also
the recurring cost for getting the different services by the occupant is
I was going through the data on transmission and distribution
loss taking place in our system. I would like to discuss this issue
since loss reduced is equivalent to energy produced.
530 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
The major concern is the loss of power in transmission and
distribution in our country which ranges from 40 to 50%. That means
when we generate 78,000 MW of power, the consumer gets only 47,000
MW of power, whereas in the industrially advanced nations the loss
is only 15% (12,000 MW). Hence we could see, comparatively we
have an additional loss of 19,000 MW of what we produce. If we
have to install capacity for this 19,000 MW we will have to make an
investment of over Rs. 76,000 crore at a conservative estimate of
Rs. 4 crore per mega watt of power generation. This is the magnitude
of the problem we are faced with. We need to take urgent action to
remedy the situation and bring down this loss by working on mission
mode. In this programme collaboration between energy producers,
transmission engineers and R&D specialists is required.
It is reported that the total energy consumption in Indian buildings
is as follows: Commercial sector: 21.6 billion kWh (32% for A/C,
60% for lighting, 8% others); Residential sector: 36 billion kwh (35%
light, 29 % fan, 7% cooler, 14% Refrigeration, 4% A/C, 11% others).
One of our experts says that for a normally constructed building,
the present energy consumption is 300 kwh per sq.m, annually which
can be brought down to 140 kwh per sq.m, annually by proper designs/
details/philosophy, whereas in Germany with its strict energy codes
it is reported that the consumption is only 50 kwh per sq.m, annually.
It is all the more important for India to achieve at least a target of 100
kWh per sq.m, annually within the next 5 years. This will need co
ordinated effort between architects, builders and the energy engineers -
a newly developed expertise.
The architects and building planners have to play a very important
role in the design of the building with these features. The seeds of
this perspective have to be sown in the schools of architecture and
town planning. Energy conservation should start right from the location
of the site, the direction of buildings, windows, doors, glare etc. the
aim should be to use maximum advantage of the sun and wind, while
minimizing the wasteful heat load from the sun into the buildings
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 531
The construction sector plays a significant role in economic
development of the country. Activities in the construction sector are
complex, highly dispersed and resource-demanding. The activities
of the sector result in the loss of important natural assets and impose
severe stress on the environment. Agricultural land is often lost through
urbanization and extraction of raw materials. The consumption of
fossil fuels contributes to increased air pollution and emissions of
greenhouse gases. Energy is required for manufacturing materials,
for transport and for construction of buildings. Apart from this initial
energy use, there is also need for energy, for functioning of buildings.
In the developed countries there is a growing demand for an
environmental impact assessment of all building projects, which includes
considerations of embodied energy, i.e. the energy that is consumed
in extraction of raw materials and production of finished building
However, construction is crucial to the prosperity and civilization
of human beings. People require habitats, schools, work places, markets,
places for sports and cultural activities. Our task therefore is to have
more and better construction for our billion people, but minimize per
capita energy consumption in the whole chain of value addition in
construction and maintenance. For example, the comparative embodied
energy consumed for different types of buildings is indicated below:
Type of Building-Embodied energy (KWH per sq.m)
1. Residential Buildings- 2200
2. Office Buildings- 5000
4. Hospital Buildings- 5500
The energy use in the production of building materials accounts
for a high proportion of the total embodied energy in buildings, and
thus improvement of energy use in production processes is a crucial
part of any overall strategy for energy conservation in the built
532 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
A good beginning has been made in the energy conservation
area due to the enactment of the Energy Conservation Act 2001. Bureau
of Energy Efficiency has been formed which has initiated the task of
developing Energy Conservation Building Codes.
In addition, peak load sharing techniques would help energy saving.
This can be done by working compressors at night and use ice slurry
during the daytime. Similarly solar energy peaks can be stored as
cooled fluids to reduce air-conditionmg loads. Recycling of water
for cooling towers will save two critical resources: energy and water.
At this stage 1 would like to recall my experience during 1983-
84, when there was severe shortage of power in Andhra Pradesh. The
Defence labs had a peak load constraint of 3 mega watt power, whereas
the connected power was over 10 mega watts. This situation led to
inefficient working of all the three labs located in the complex. To
overcome the situation the three Directors of the laboratories at
Hyderabad devised an innovative plan to stagger the working hours
in such a way that one set of laboratories used to work for a four day
week (from Monday to Thursday) of 10-1/2 hour duration per day.
The other set worked on a different four days (Thursday to Sunday)
with one common working day available among all labs to facilitate
inter laboratory communication. This system ensured conservation
of energy and maintained efficiency within the peak load constraint
imposed by the state electricity board. This is one way of practical
The energy conservation in the shop floor has to start right from
the operator. We have to clearly create awareness and a sense of
responsibility among all operators to conserve energy in their own
limited area. One method of planned improvement can come by having
a constant review of the energy utilization and reasons for variance.
The variance analysis will lead to determination of the causes of increase
which in turn can be attended to by the maintenance personnel. Also,
there is a need to install energy conservation control system which
will be initiated whenever the machinery is idle and is not required to
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 533
In continuous operation chemical plants, switching off and on
may lead to inefficient process leading to enhanced energy utilization.
Wherever continuous reliable energy is not available it will be
economical to use back-up system to ensure process efficiency and
prevent infructuous energy expenditure due to unplanned start - stop
India is well poised for the generation of solar energy in view of
the continuous availability of sunshine throughout the year. Installation
of centralized solar photovoltaic systems, which can be fed to a grid,
will be a long-term economically viable solution with added benefits
of pollution control. Present solar cells have the efficiency of 13 to
15%. But the research effort shows that, with the advent of CNT/
Polymer Composite Based Photovoltaic Cell, the efficiency of
Photovoltaic cell will increase to 50%. This can pave the way for
building mini 100 mega watt solar power stations in different regions
of the country like Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Tamil
Nadu. Industries can plan one or two megawatt captive power plants
based on either solar energy or biomass plants using solid waste.
Energy is a vital input for industry. Enterprise-wise energy
conservation is an important wealth generator for every industry. For
ensuring competitiveness per capita energy utilization is an important
index. Keeping this in mind, I would request the Conference to address
the following issues relating to practical energy conservation
(a) Evolve energy utilization norms for different industry
such as cement, aluminum, steel, urea, textile etc. on
per capita basis and provide a challenge to designers
to work towards the target.
(b) Create an enterprise-wise review mechanism to reveal
the variance from planned utilization to the actual. As
far as possible try to allocate the responsibility for this
variance and take immediate corrective action.
(c) Create an idea bank in which employees can provide
innovative solutions for energy efficient operations.
534 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
There must be a system of analysis of ideas for
implementing practical ideas on the shop floor.
(d) Progressively install energy efficient lamps, energy
efficient heating and AC system in the enterprise.
(e) Energy conservation award through a structured
competition can be introduced among the various
divisions in the enterprise.
(f) In house R&D establishment should constantly work
towards energy efficient processes for adoption.
My best wishes to all the participants of this Conference for a
fruitful deliberation and providing energy conservation solutions to
International Partnership in Lunar
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the 6th International Conference
on Exploration and Utilization of the Moon organized by the Physical
Research laboratory, Ahmedabad. I greet the organizers, eminent
planetary exploration and space scientists from India and abroad,
academicians, industrialists, engineers, entrepreneurs and distinguished
guests. I understand that the International Lunar Conference is a forum
to discuss scientific results of the ongoing and future space missions
related to lunar exploration. This Conference is also utilized to develop
understanding on various strategies, initiatives and missions leading
to a permanent human presence on our Moon as the future objective.
I am happy to note that the interactions that took place in the
earlier Conferences have been beneficial to participating countries
through the intense sharing of scientific knowledge, data and hands-
on mission experiences of various space agencies pursuing lunar
I find that nearly 100 scientific papers are being presented in
this Conference and that the moon missions being planned and conducted
by all the space faring nations of the world are being presented, reviewed
and discussed. I note with excitement that many key issues related to
space science and moon missions are being addressed in this Conference.
These deliberations are important for the world space science
community. This will enable you to obtain a comprehensive picture
of the goals and policies of all nations striving towards a common
vision of space research being made available for the benefit of all
mankind. Indeed this augurs well for progress towards universal peace
and harmony that is a cherished goal of the people of the world as a
Address at the International Conference on Exploration and Utilization of Moon
(ICEUM-6), Udaipur, 23 November 2004
536 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
During the 20th century, discoveries of significance were rarely
motivated by political needs except during the World War and cold
war periods. Whereas in the 21 st century, challenges are put on science,
particularly the space sciences, due to the six billion growing population
of the planet, whose needs are continuously increasing and the resources
are continuously diminishing in the areas of energy, water and minerals.
Hence space scientists have to work for building satellites with
high performance sensors and developing cost-effective launch systems
for meeting the growing demand for such launches. The International
Conference may discuss not only the scientific research needed for
planetary exploration, but also should address the problem of bringing
down the launch cost through the application of advances in space
Between the Moon and earth there are five Libration Point regions
called LI, L2, L3, L4, and L5. In these regions the gravitational force
is minimum and tends to zero. L2 is the preferred Lunar Material
Transfer Station. L4 and L5 are the preferred locations for the Space
Colony, which is progressing to become a reality in the next two
decades time. It is essential to characterize L2, L4, and L5 points and
also configure the Lunar material Transfer Stations and Space Colony
Space science has had a phenomenal growth due to the availability
of rockets and spacecraft that can carry hundreds of kilograms of
apparatus into interplanetary space, and thus obtain data, which we
could otherwise never get from the ground.
The Western nations and Russia made available such rockets
and spacecraft for scientific work from early 1950's. The Eastern
nations Japan, China and now India started a few decades later. Obtaining
such scientific data opens new avenues of attack on some of the most
important problems in science. These problems are related to the manner
in which the sun controls the atmosphere of the earth, the moon, and
other bodies in the solar system; to the origin and history of the solar
system; and to the structure and evolution of the stars and galaxies.
The moon has retained a record of its geological history that
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 537
probably extends back through many billions of years to the infancy
of the solar system.
For an understanding of the early history of the solar system the
Moon is even more important scientifically than Mars and Venus
which like planet Earth have atmospheres and geological activity which
change the face of the planets with passage of geological time. The
moon thus plays a special role in the investigation of the solar system
and its exploration and utilization.
The area of the moon is one-sixteenth that of our planet, more
than that of Africa. Such a territory will take many years (and perhaps
many lives) to explore in detail. Its mass is billions of times more
than all the coal, iron, minerals and ores that man has shifted in the
whole of history. But the moon does not have enough mass to give it
a gravitational pull and hence the moon has just one-sixth of earth's
This low gravity has several consequences, almost all of them
beneficial for mankind's utilization of the moon. The most important
is that this low gravity has made the moon unable to retain an atmosphere
if it ever had one. Hence for all practical purposes, the lunar surface
is a perfect vacuum. With no atmosphere to retain the sun's heat, the
moon is a world with very great temperature extremes. No air means
no weather, and the only change is the unvarying cycle of day and
Turning slowly on its axis, the lunar day and night are almost
thirty times that of planet earth. Since this is about the same time the
moon takes to revolve around the earth, it always keeps the same
hemisphere turned towards the earth. Until Russian scientists, in October
1959, with their Lunik III moon probe took pictures of the reverse
side of the moon, mankind had never till then known about the dark
face of the moon!
These lunar characteristics have a vital implication for space
science. As civilization spreads throughout the solar system, the moon
will provide the main link between earth and her scattered children.
The earth's ionosphere reflects all but the shortest radio waves back
to earth. Its erratic atmosphere prevents the use of lasers for
538 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
communication into space. On the airless moon this would not be a
problem, for the moon's sky is perennially clear to waves of all
Thus the moon will soon become a "Telecommunications Hub"
for interplanetary communications, aiming its tightly focused laser
beams to other planets and ships in space. With interplanetary
communication systems located on the far side, the moon would also
shield these communication stations from the continuous radio emissions
from the earth. The far side of the moon would be the quietest place
within millions of kilometres from the earth, in the sense of radio
Earth-based plans for space travel requires gigantic boosters with
tiny payloads. The payload fraction of rocket launchers does not exceed
more than 1 or 2% of the launch weight. Thus to put one or two
tonnes in space requires more than one hundred tonnes of launch mass
most of which - nearly 70% - is oxygen. Even the Space Shuttle that
has had two tragic failures carries just 30 tonnes and its launch weight
is over 2000 tonnes.
Such gigantic rocket-based space transportation systems, with
marginal payload fractions, are wholly uneconomical for carrying
freight and men to the moon. It can be compared to a transcontinental
aircraft carrying just one or two passengers and being discarded after
Studies in India have shown that the greatest economy through
the highest payload fractions is obtained when fully reusable space
transportation systems are designed which carry no oxidizer at launch,
but gather liquid oxygen while the spacecraft ascends directly from
earth to orbit in a single stage.
Using the earth's atmosphere synergistically for space
transportation is thus one of the most effective means for low cost
access to low earth parking orbit in outer space. In fact, as far back as
1964 studies in the US have reported that a payload fraction as high
as 30% is obtainable with in-flight collection of liquid oxygen for
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 539
The studies in India suggest that an "aerobic" space transportation
vehicle can indeed have a 30% payload fraction provided its launch
weight is about 1000 tonnes, or about half the weight of the space
shuttle. With 20 times the payload fraction and 100 times reuse, the
cost of payload in orbit can be reduced dramatically by 20 x 100 or
nearly 2000 times lower than current shuttle costs of access to space.
Thus, scientific exploration of the moon and the solar system
will go on using the rocket launchers of the later part of the 20th
century. However, the real economic value of moon exploration and
utilization will occur only when mankind builds fully reusable space
transportation systems with very high payload efficiencies. This will
become available when the technology of oxygen liquefaction in high
speed flight in earth's atmosphere is mastered. This technology will
also come in useful for mass collection from the atmosphere of other
planets at a later stage in space exploration.
So we have to get into space from earth at very, very low cost
first before freight and manned missions to the Moon and Mars missions
become feasible. I note that among the papers being presented in this
Conference is one on International Collaboration on Space
Transportation Systems to the Moon and Mars, and hope these studies
consider, with India, new types of "aerobic" space transportation for
low cost access to space.
The low gravity and hard vacuum on the Moon's surface is,
however, a very great advantage from space transportation
considerations for the return flight to earth. Space vehicles could leave
the moon without burning any fuel at all. A horizontal launching track
like those used on aircraft carriers could accelerate the vehicle electrically
because there is no air resistance on the moon's surface, and lunar
escape velocity of 2.3 kms per second compared to the 11.2 kms/sec
for escape from earth's gravity. Thus the only fuel a vehicle would
carry while returning to earth from the moon would be a small amount
for re-entry manoeuvres and landing.
Thus, two systems and related technologies would result in
spectacular improvements on the current state-of-the-art expendable
rocket launchers for routine, economical moon missions. These are
540 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
firstly, reliable, high payload-fraction, aerobic reusable space
transportation systems to place smaller moon-mission vehicles in
parking orbit, and secondly, electrically operated catapult-launchers
on the moon's surface to enable these small vehicles to return to earth.
It is certain that civilization on earth will run out of fossil fuels
in this century. Oil reserves are on the verge of depletion, followed
by gas and finally coal. However, solar energy is clean and inexhaustible.
Even if 1 % of India's land area were harvested of solar energy, the
yield would be nearly 1000 gigawatts, or 10 times more than the current
consumption. However solar flux on earth is available for just 6-8
Space solar power stations have been studied extensively in the
past 30 to 40 years. However, non-availability of low cost, fully reusable
space transportation has denied mankind the benefit of space solar
power stations in geo-stationary orbit. These orbits are almost full
now and an option is to set up space solar power constellations in
low earth equatorial orbits especially for developing countries.
Unlike Earth, the Moon is the ideal environment for large-area
solar converters. The solar flux to the lunar surface is predicable and
dependable. There is no air or water to degrade large-area thin film
devices. The Moon is extremely quiet mechanically. It is devoid of
weather, significant seismic activity, and biological processes that
degrade terrestrial equipment. Solar collectors can be made that are
unaffected by decades of exposure to solar cosmic rays and the solar
wind. Sensitive circuitry and wiring can be buried under a few to tens
of centimetres of lunar soil and completely protected against solar
radiation, temperature extremes, and micrometeorites.
Studies have also shown that it is technically and economically
feasible to provide at least 100,000 GWe of solar electric energy from
facilities on the Moon. The Lunar Solar Power (LSP) System can
supply to Earth electric power that is independent of the biosphere
and does not introduce C02, ash, or other material wastes into the
Inexhaustible new net electrical energy provided by the LSP System
enables the creation of new net material wealth on Earth that is decoupled
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 541
from the biosphere. Given adequate clean electric power, humanity's
material needs can be acquired from common resources and recycled
without the use of fossil fuels. ESP power increases the ability of
tomorrow's generations to meet tomorrow's needs, and enables
humanity to move beyond simply attempting to sustain itself within
the biosphere to nurturing the biosphere.
In the last century, man has consumed more of the earth's mineral
resources than since the emergence of human beings on earth millions
of years ago. A time will soon arise when earth is fully depleted of its
mineral wealth and need would arise for mining in space. NASA-
Apollo missions found that lunar surface soils are comprised of about
20 per cent metals (suitable for space construction) and 20 per cent
silicon (which is needed for making solar power cells). Much of the
rest of lunar soil is composed of oxygen.
The Moon also has other advantages as a source of construction
materials for near Earth orbit. Its weak surface gravity is only one-
sixth as strong as Earth's. As a result, in combination with its small
diameter, it takes less than five per cent as much energy to boost
materials from the lunar surface into orbit compared with the launch
energy needed from Earth's surface into orbit. Electromagnetic mass
drivers powered by solar energy could provide low-cost transportation
of lunar materials to space construction sites.
Low gravity manufacturing holds tremendous promise for mankind
in new materials and medicines. The US is reported to be keen on
setting up a manned base on the moon soon. Studies also have shown
that the needs of 12 workers could be met by a 16-metre diameter
inflatable habitat. This would contain facilities for exercise, operations
control, clean up, lab work, hydroponics gardening, a wardroom, private
crew quarters, dust-removing devices for lunar surface work, an airlock,
and lunar rover and lander vehicles. The lunar mining base could
also enable man to bring back to earth shipments of Helium 3, which
is reported to be abundant on the moon, as a valuable fuel for
542 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
I would suggest to the Conference to undertake the following
1. Creation of a data bank of all the scientific experiments
relevant to lunar exploration carried out in the past and planned
2. Based on the analysis of the space scientific experiments
done so far associated with lunar missions, new experiments
can be designed for meeting the geological need, moon
mapping, resource locations, and identification of possible
sites for locating industrial units including drug development.
3. Planning for future lunar experiments with international co
operation, for cost-effective missions.
4. Evolving the standards for payloads and piggy pack payloads
which will go into exclusive scientific spacecrafts for lunar
missions. Also standards may be generated for small and
medium payloads that can be integrated as piggy pack payload
in the Polar, Geo-synchronous launch vehicles. This action
will result in a number of payloads in orbit through the
participation of a number of countries.
5. Working out a strategy and a standing mechanism for getting
the support of deep space network stations during the
operation of lunar missions of different countries.
6. Creating a mechanism of exchange programme for the young
space scientists to work in different laboratories pursuing
7. Nominating a team of experts among the conference
participants to create a data base and information system of
all the exploratory work executed so far on lunar missions
by different countries which can be subsequently made
available for participants through the website of this
Our Moon is one of the 70 Moons in the solar system. Galileo
was the very first person to see the mountains of the Moon, Jupiter's
moons and the Pliades star clusters through a telescope. Even after
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 543
400 years, the excitement of discovery still has not subsided and every
astronomer and the budding students of astronomy have been able to
explore the moon with binoculars and telescopes and share their
excitement with birds of the same feather.
Many centuries ago, an Indian sage, Maharishi Patanjali said
that before man attempts to conquer outer space he needs to understand
fully his inner space. This call for vision with caution is as true now
as it was in the past, probably more so. The Universe has evoked
either one of two responses in human beings. Fear of the unknown or
a determination to find out more about the universe and how it works.
From the first was born a belief in God, which ultimately took
the form of the great religions of the world. From the second rose a
long tradition of scientific inquiry. However, science and spirituality
are not mutually exclusive at the deeper levels. There is an interesting
anecdote about Isaac Newton. He had invited a scientist friend of his,
a professed atheist, to dinner. Newton had a model of the solar system
on a table. The friend was enchanted with the model and exclaimed
"What a beautiful and exquisite model, who made it?" To this Newton
replied:"How can you suggest that this model has a maker when you
say that the universe itself has no Divine Creator?"
One can therefore conclude that science, especially space science
exploring and utilizing the universe as a whole, can actually strengthen
and even reinforce rather than weaken our faith in a Supreme Being.
While a truly pious person loves God with his heart, a truly dedicated
scientist loves God with his mind.
Man's quest to understand this closest neighbour of ours and
our only natural satellite is a parallel to his efforts to understand universal
nature as a whole. Many generations would continue to work together
for exploring and utilizing lunar resources. The Moon will be a
continuous source of exciting new research, surprises and above all a
vehicle for making science what it should be - a tool to understand
nature and apply for societal upliftment.
Nanotechnology to Make India a
INCE THIS SCIENCE CONGRESS focuses on health technology
as fulcrum of development, I am starting with thoughts on pharma
In the year 2004,1 have visited five R&D laboratories of pharma
industries and three health centres and also I have addressed seven
medical conferences on Ophthalmology, Cardiology, Liver diseases,
allergic diseases, Vascular surgery, general surgery, atherosclerosis
and thrombosis and Pharma Vision 2020.1 was very happy to see the
economic strength of the pharma industry resulting from the
technological innovation of their R&D laboratories. In the year 2000
there was a fear among the members of the health sector and scientists
that they would not be able to compete in the international market
due to WTO environment. When I now visited these pharma units, I
find the situation is totally changed. The confidence of the pharma
community is coming in a big way due to the establishment of state-
of-the-art R&D labs. During my visit I discussed with the scientists
and technologists and I am completely convinced that Indian pharma
sector is becoming very robust with a sound research and development
base. Even though they have developed hundreds of molecules, the
way the scientific and laboratory experiments are progressing, I am
convinced that at least three major molecules will transform into drugs
Now I would like to give my visualization of developed India in
2020 and the mission of scientific community.
I. A Nation where the rural and urban divide is reduced to a
Address at the 92nd Indian Science Congress, Ahmedabad, 5 January 2005
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 545
2. A Nation where there is an equitable distribution of energy,
quality water and access to quality electric power.
3. A Nation where agriculture, industry and service sector work
together in symphony, absorbing technology thereby resulting
in sustained wealth generation leading to higher employment
4. A Nation where education is not denied to any meritorious
candidates because of societal or economic discrimination.
5. A Nation which is the best destination for the most talented
scholars and scientists from all over the world.
6. A Nation where the best of health care is available to all the
billion population and the communicable diseases like AIDS/
TB, water and vector borne diseases, Cardiac diseases and
7. A Nation where the governance uses the best of the
technologies to be responsive, transparent, easily accessible
and simple in rules, thereby corruption-free.
8. A Nation where poverty has been totally eliminated, illiteracy
and crime against women are eradicated and the society is
9. A Nation that is prosperous, healthy, secure, peaceful and
10. A Nation that is one of the best places to live in on the earth
and brings smiles on a billion plus faces.
These are the ten dimensional transformations needed for
competitive India and we have to work for it. Towards this end I
would like to share thoughts on expected important achievements in
Science and Technology in 2005.
I have visited a number of science and technology laboratories
and also had the opportunity to interact with the scientists and
technicians. My assessment is: five important S&T areas will influence
Indian society in health care, education, employment generation and
546 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Many Indian laboratories and hospitals are working in Research
and Development of Stem Cell growth. Advancement in stem cell
research in the country has brought confidence among expert doctors
to take up its clinical application in heart, eye, pancreas, liver, neural,
kidney diseases and spinal injury. Drawing of tens of thousands of
stem cells, which are capable of transforming themselves into almost
any kind of tissues from the suffering patients and injecting them
into the heart to stimulate heart restoration has already been practised.
This increases the pumping efficiency from 25% to 40% over a period
of four months. The recent identification and characterization of
progenitors with stem cell properties has opened new avenues that
will be useful for treating functional impairments caused by the death
of specific cell population in the eye region. The stem cells also help
restoration of vision in patients who have these diseases, by repopulating
the damaged ocular surface cells or retinal cells from further
degeneration. Many health care institutions in India are working in
stem cell area and have successfully treated heart patients and eye
patients. Recently a patient with spinal cord injuries has been
successfully treated with stem cells from umbilical cord blood in South
Korea and it could signal a leap forward in the treatment of spinal
cord injuries. Definitely we will see widespread stem cell research
and its application to treatment of many diseases in a cost-effective
Availability of quality education for remote areas requires tele
education as a vital tool. ISRO's EDUSAT (Educational Satellite)
programme is designed to provide support to education through low-
cost ground segments and to reach the un-reached people of India.
The satellite is specially configured to have multiple beams covering
different regions of India, through five regional beams and a national
This system will be useful for school, college, higher level of
education; and non-formal education. The EDUSAT, when fully
operational will have a capacity of 30 uplinks and about 5000 remote
terminals per uplink. EDUSAT is expected to provide one-lakh fifty
thousand ground terminals in its full capacity. EDUSAT is not only a
Receive Only Terminal system; it works on an IP protocol and brings
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 547
both way interactivity and collaboration. EDUSAT coupled with the
broadband through fibre, land wireless broadband will form a
heterogeneous network in taking the quality education to all parts of
the country. For example, a mathematics teacher takes a class at
Bhimavaram, Andhra Pradesh; it is beamed to EDUSAT satellite in
real time and the students in the class rooms at Samastipur in Bihar
will see the teacher and hear the lessons. Hence a good teacher teaching
anywhere in the country in any language can be heard, seen and
interacted with through the implementation of interactive tele-education
delivery system over the EDUSAT, broadband and wireless
Use of bio-fuel will increase manyfold. Bio-fuel plant farming,
harvesting, extraction and esterification process will provide large
employment opportunities apart from bringing down the import of
crude oil. Jatropha curcas is one of the bio-fuel plants and it can grow
well in dryland with very little water input. Once grown the crop has
fifty years of life. Fruiting can take place in this plant from six months
to three years. It yields up to five tonnes per hectare of oil seeds
which can produce two tonnes of bio-diesel. Bio-diesel plants grown
in eleven million hectares of land can yield a revenue of approximately
Rs.20,000 crore a year and provide employment to over eleven million
people both for plantation, running of the extraction plants and trans
esterification. Use of bio-diesel is carbon monoxide emission free.
This oil can also be used for soap and candle industries. It gives the
by-product called glycerin, which is used in pharma industry. De
oiled cake is a raw material for composting and plantation is good for
honey production. Jatropha saplings can be multiplied through tissue
culture and further research is required on hybrid varieties for increasing
the oil content of seeds and drought resistant characteristics of the
plant. Presently, the indigenously designed bio-fuel plant for 250 ltr/
day is in operation. We have to design and develop bio-fuel plants of
3 to 10 tonnes per day capacity for installation in different parts of
the country. Effective marketing chain need to be planned for enabling
farmers to reap the benefits directly. Bio-fuel mission will provide
technological and employment generation focuses for the rural sector.
Use of eleven million hectares of waste land for Jetropha cultivation
can lead to generation of minimum twelve million jobs.
548 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
The Indo-Russian joint venture has developed the supersonic
cruise missile, the first of its kind in the world scene. It is a remarkable
achievement for both countries. It is a force multiplier for defence
forces. It is a universal missile flying at the speed of Mach 3 for
multiplatform configuration by a variety of trajectories against multiple
targets. It is an opportunity for India and Russia to go in a big way to
produce competitively and market the Brahmos to suitable countries.

This year I have visited a number of pharma R&D centres. There
is a great movement in transforming molecules to drugs. I feel in
2005, at least three drugs will materialize leading to the treatment of
a certain type of cancer and the other for diabetes and inflammatory
diseases. In addition to the above scientists have to take note of the
progress made in nano-science and nanotechnology and participate
in research and product development to make India a leading player
and become an exporter of nanotechnology products.
Throughout the last 120 centuries, unique cultures have come
into existence due to advancement in technology. The first 118 centuries
had a dominance of primarily stone, bronze and iron ages. The last
two centuries have seen rapid development of chemical age. The
advancements made in material science and technology gave the impetus
for both nuclear and biological age to flourish. Succession of these
technology periods has involved progression from simpler materials
to more complex forms of science and engineering. We are today at
the convergence of nano, bio and information technologies. This age,
I feel, will create historical revolution and we must be at the driver's
seat to contribute towards this societal change.
When I think of nano-science and nanotechnology, I am reminded
of two personalities. The first person is Richard Feynman, who described
the concept of 'building machines" atom by atom in his talk at Caltech
titled "There is plenty of room at the bottom". The second person is
Eric Drexler, who wrote the book titled "Nano Systems, Molecular
machinery, manufacturing and computation".
Since independence, the country had all along been taking recourse
to technology for societal changes and economic prosperity. A nation
that is alert should be sensitive to the changes that take place to the
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 549
technological fabric of the world and prepare itself for the arrival of
newer changes in the horizon.
We believe that nanotechnology would give us an opportunity;
if we take an appropriate and timely action, we can become one of
the important technological nations in the world.
The world market in 2004 is for nano materials, nano tools, nano
devices and nano-biotechnology - all put together is over hundred
billion dollars. It has been noticed that the fastest growing area among
Carbon nano tubes and its composites will give rise to super
strong, smart and intelligent structures in the field of material science.
Nano-biomedical sensors will play a major role in glucose detection
and endoscopic implants. Drug delivery system will revolutionize
the health care to a large extent.
Molecular switches and circuits along with nano cell will pave
the way for the next generation computers. Ultra dense computer
memory coupled with excellent electrical performance will give the
society low power, low cost, nano size and yet faster assemblies.
The last four decades have also affected the packaging concept.
Electronics packaging of the past has given way to the present
Microsystems packaging and the shift in the trend is now towards the
Recently I met Prof. Vijay K Varadan of Pennsylvania State
University, US. He shared his experience on the possible line of
treatment for Parkinson's disease and epilepsy. The primary symptoms
in Parkinson's disease as you are all aware are tremor or trembling in
hands, arms, legs, jaw, and face, rigidity or stiffness of the limbs,
slowness of movement and impaired balance. Prof. Varadan has devised
a wireless system for monitoring and control of Parkinson's disease.
The system consists of an implantable DNA insert in the head region
for generating a pulse to the nerve system; controlled either by a modified
pacemaker or smart hat. A passive polymer-based gyro sensor is
implanted in the tremor location. The sensor gets the power from the
550 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
pacemaker and the pacemaker then reads the tremor motion. The
pacemaker then generates the pulse in the implanted device in the
head to control the tremor. This appears to be a promising line of
treatment for such diseases. Prof. Varadan also has reported that the
few patients affected by Parkinson's disease had a full recovery.
CNT (Carbon Nano Tubes) based Photo-voltaic Cell: Presently
silicon based photo-voltaic cells have only an efficiency of 13 to 15%.
This has become a big challenge for converting solar energy into
power. Research has shown promise of increasing the efficiency of
the photo-voltaic cell to 40 to 50% using CNT. This will enable us to
have highly efficient 100 MW solar energy plants in different regions
of the country which will have virtually zero recurring cost.
As you are aware, the coastal region of our country faced a severe
calamity due to shock embedded tidal wave, which will need an
innovative package for reconstruction of homes of the affected
The scientists present here, have to ask yourselves, what you
can do in such a situation for bringing relief to the people and also
what science can do to prevent such devastating occurrences in future.
They can definitely contribute in the areas of prediction of earthquake
on land and seabed.
The seismologists have put most of their efforts in studying seismic
variations and patterns of foreshocks and aftershocks. In certain
countries, earthquakes have been successfully predicted using a
noticeable increase in background seismic activities. If foreshocks
can be recognized early, giving a timely warning can save lives of
many people. The stages of a rising seismic activity include building
up of elastic strain along a fault, development of cracks, increase in
stress, decrease in electrical resistivity etc. This theoretical series of
events could eventually lead to a way to predict the occurrence of
major earthquakes. The events are still theoretical and need much
more data to make them useful enough for practical applications.
Technology is the non-linear tool available to humanity which
can effect fundamental changes in the ground rules of economic
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 551
competitiveness. Science is linked to technology through applications.
Technology is linked to economy and environment through manufacture.
Economy and environment linked to technology promotes prosperity
The scientists and technologists whatever work or mission they
do always have to ask the question, will any part of my scientific
work have a positive impact on meeting the human needs?
Now I would like to discuss about the challenges that the
nation has to overcome and certain missions which are required
to be implemented to transform India into a developed nation by
The number of PURA units for the whole country is estimated
to be 7000. This envisages integrated connectivities to bring prosperity
to rural India. These are - physical connectivity of the village clusters
through quality roads and transport; electronic connectivity through
tele-communication with high bandwidth fibre optic cables reaching
the rural areas from urban cities and through Internet kiosks; and
knowledge connectivity through education, vocational training for
farmers, artisans and craftsmen and entrepreneurship programmes.
These three connectivities will lead to economic connectivity through
starting of enterprises with the help of banks, micro credits and marketing
Each PURA cluster will connect about 20-30 villages depending
upon the region and population and will cost about Rs.100 crores.
This is a viable and sustainable business proposition. After initial
short-term employment during construction etc. we have to plan for
initiating actions for providing regular employment and self employment
opportunities in nationally competitive small enterprises in agro
processing, manufacturing and services sectors for about 3000 people.
If the industrial/business parks are marketed well, they can generate
employment opportunities in support and services sector for about
10,000 people. This will provide sustainable economy for the rural
sector. In this national mission, bankers can promote entrepreneurship
in the rural areas. This will lead to the removal of urban-rural divide.
552 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
A large number of banks have entrepreneurial development
programmes. Banks have also been funding small scale industries of
different types in various regions. The small scale industrialist is a
promising candidate for becoming the chief executive for managing
the PURA complexes in an integrated way. PURA enterprises can
also undertake management of schools, health care units, vocational
training centres, chilling plants, silos and building a market, banking
system and the regional business or industrial units. A new mission
mode management style has to emerge for PURA enterprises. It should
not be looking for protective legislations to support them. Rather they
should be efficient to compete with others. This new PURA enterprise
needs partnership from the bank, from the Government and also from
the private entrepreneurs. Banks can train the entrepreneur for managing
the PURA in their training centres and also provide them loans for
creating and running PURAs as a business proposition.
I would like to talk to you about the experiences of three of our
Dr D.S. Kothari, a Professor in Delhi University was an outstanding
Physicist and also an Astrophysicist. He is well known for ionization
of matter by pressure in cold compact objects like planets. This theory
is complementary to thermal ionization work done by Dr Meghnad
Saha, his guru. When he became the Scientific Adviser to Defence
Minister he established the Defence Science Centre which became
the nucleus for generation of products and systems required by the
Dr. Homi Bhabha carried out research relating to cosmic radiation.
In 1939, he joined Sir C.V. Raman in IISc Bangalore. Later, he was
asked to start the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research with focus
on nuclear science and mathematical science, and established the Atomic
Energy Commission in 1948. Multi-centres were bom as part of BARC
with his vision in nuclear science to nuclear technology, nuclear power,
nuclear devices and nuclear medicine.
Prof Vikram Sarabhai, the youngest of the three, worked with
Sir C.V. Raman in experimental cosmic ray. Prof Sarabhai established
the Physical Research Laboratory in Ahmedabad with space research
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 553
as focus. In later years he became the Director of Space S&T Centre.
The SSTC (1963) started with launching sounding rockets for space
atmospheric research. Prof. Vikram Sarabhai unfurled the space mission
for India in 1970 that we should build Satellite Launch Vehicle
capability, to put our communication satellites in the geo-synchronous
orbit and remote sensing satellites in the polar orbit. Also, he envisaged
that launch vehicles built in India should be launched from Indian
soil. This one visionary thought led to intensive research in multiple
fields of science and space technology. Many of us had the fortune to
be part of Prof. Vikram Sarabhai's vision. Today, India has the capability
to build any type of satellite and launch it from its soil.
These three Indian scientists, all of them physicists, started physics
research institutions that blossomed into defence technology, nuclear
technology and space technology. When I study deep into their
knowledge and the vision, I believe they would have realized that
science has to be promoted through political systems. It is essential
that technologies that give immediate benefits to the people directly
or indirectly should be successfully put forward. The three great
institutions have emerged with 20,000 scientists spread in institutions
all over the country. Another important message conveyed by these
three great scientists is that basic science is very vital for growth of
technology and growth of scientific and technological human resource
thereby transforming the society.
Particularly for young scientists who have assembled here, I am
giving these role models so that when you are doing scientific research
you always ask yourself, "Can my research and development task
contribute to the upliftment of the people of my country?" It may be
any area of research: medical science, physics, chemistry, space research,
nuclear research, defence research, mathematical science, earth sciences
etc. Particularly for a developing country like ours which has a vision
for a developed nation, your contribution in the scientific field is all
Can Indian Science inspire youth?
J AM INDEED very happy to talk to you on this Science Day,
which is celebrated on the 28th of February every year, the day
one of our great scientists and Nobel Laureate Sir C.V. Raman made
a landmark discovery. On this day, the nation pays tribute and expresses
its gratitude to all the scientists who have made our dream of using
the science and scientific discoveries as vehicles for economic
development a reality. If the nation's science is celebrated, it will
also attract many young children to take up science as a career. In
addition, the scientists of the nation may like to rededicate themselves
to create high quality scientific research output from India and make
the nation proud. Science day is a day to remind us that the important
ingredient for societal transformation would mainly come from science.
I would like to share with you, particularly the youth, the scientific
progress made in our country towards enriching the society and
signifying our national spirit "Can Indian science inspire youth"?
One of the major breakthroughs in science in the 20th century
that had an everlasting impact on humankind is the most celebrated
work of Einstein. Einstein explained, for the first time in 1905, the
principle of the inertia of energy as a universal law. The famous energy
equation E=MC2 was given to the world. This equation has become
the basis for converting matter into energy giving birth to a new avenue
called the nuclear energy for producing electricity to light up our
cities and villages. Science at times is a double-edged sword. While
the E=MC2 of Einstein changed the way the humanity looked at the
energy problem, it also paved the way for the design of Atom bomb.
The latter application even today threatens to disturb the world peace.
In spite of this, Einstein's work is most profound and opened up many
areas of research and development in physics. The scientific community
Address to the Nation on Science Day 2005, New Delhi, 28 February 2005
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 555
of the world has decided to pay tribute to Einstein by declaring the
year 2005 as the International year of Physics. As announced by me
during the address to both the houses of Parliament on 25th February
2005, India will celebrate Einstein's anniversary by paying special
attention to basic sciences in our schools and colleges, modernizing
and reforming our institutions of science and, above all, rededicating
itself to the spread of scientific temper. When I think of Einstein, I
am reminded of the observation made by him about our father of the
nation, Mahatma Gandhi: "Generations to come will scarcely believe
that such one as this (Gandhiji) ever in flesh and blood walked upon
Let me refer to Raman Effect. Raman is one of the greatest scientists
that India ever produced. Raman was extremely creative even with
inexpensive equipment and in simple environments. One of his notable
contributions to science is the discovery of what later came to be
known as "Raman Effect". Raman Effect is the appearance of additional
lines in the spectrum of monochromatic light that has been scattered
by a transparent material medium. Sir C. V. Raman discovered the
effect in 1928. The energy and thus the frequency and the wavelength
of the scattered light are changed as the light either imparts rotational
or vibrational energy to the scattering molecules or takes energy away.
The line spectrum of the scattered light will have one prominent line
corresponding to the original wavelength of the incident radiation,
plus additional lines to each side of it corresponding to the shorter or
longer wavelengths of the altered portion of the light. This Raman
spectrum is the unique characteristic of the material medium. Thus,
Raman spectrometry is a useful technique in physical and chemical
research, particularly for the characterization of materials.
This in-elastically scattered light is called 'RAMAN SCATTER'.
Energy difference between incident light and the Raman scattered
light is equal to the energy involved in changing the molecule vibrational
state. The Raman Effect is useful in the study of molecular energy
levels, structure development and multi component qualitative analysis.
Raman Effect has continuously impacted every field of science.
Its role in spectroscopy, medical diagnostics and material
556 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
characterization had been phenomenal. The Raman Effect had been
used in many new areas of science, the most recent being in the
development of a continuous silicon laser. Instruments and techniques
based on Raman Effect make a huge industry all over the world.
In a paper published February 17,2005 in Nature, Intel researchers
disclosed the development of the first continuous wave all-silicon
laser using the Raman Effect. They built the experimental device using
the standard CMOS manufacturing processes.
Intel researchers incorporated a novel diode-like structure into
the silicon cavity laser. This diode combined with the Raman Effect
produces a continuous laser beam at a new wavelength. This
breakthrough device could lead to many practical applications such
as optical amplifiers, lasers, wavelength converters, and new kinds
of highly efficient optical devices. A low-cost all-silicon Raman laser
could inspire innovation in the development of new medical sensors
Over the next five to ten years, the computing and communications
industries would face increasing challenges to deliver more data and
faster. Consumers will be downloading full-length movies, not just
photos and music files. People will also require faster access to these
large amounts of data. While microprocessors are projected to meet
these future demands, the bandwidth of the interconnects needs to be
increased to meet the speed of the microprocessors. With the new
work of Intel using Raman Effect to produce continuous silicon laser,
the material convergence will take place very soon and faster networks
Now, I would like to talk about another great Indian scientist,
Dr. G.N. Ramachandran known as GNR amongst scientists. GNR's
life is indeed an example worthy of emulation by all scientists, which
was a fusion of curiosity, creativity and problem solving ability for
successful missions. GNR was wondering how to go about with x-
ray diffraction and x-ray crystallography base with application to bio
molecules as a main theme. J.D. Bernal, the famous crystallographer
and chemist who was on a visit to India in 1942 felt that all the structures
proposed so far for collagen were unsatisfactory and suggested that
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 557
GNR could take a look at that. How to get collagen was indeed a big
problem for GNR at that time. He presented his problem to Dr.
Nayudamma, the then Director of CLRI. Within a few days, Dr.
Nayudamma procured a tube full of collagen from Australia. This
helped GNR to publish the first innovative paper on the collagen
structure, which gave strikingly original triple helix - it appeared in
the journal Nature on August 7,1954. The proposed structure consisted
of three separate helical chains, with their axis parallel to the fibre
axis, stacked in a hexagonal array. This structure was not only innovative,
it also provided better quantitative agreement with the X-ray data.
Collagen is today finding large-scale application in the treatment of
third degree bum injuries, since it has been found to have extraordinary
healing properties. Also collagen has led to a separate branch of biology
named structural biology, which is being taught in many universities.
GNR can rightly be called as the father of structural biology. The
world will always be thankful to him, for giving the famous
Let me now discuss the glorious phase of Indian science. In India,
science and technology in the pre-independence era, specifically starting
from the thirties was influenced by the six great scientists of international
repute. They are Sir C. V. Raman, Prof Chandrasekhar Subramaniam,
S.N. Bose, J.C. Bose, Meghnad Saha, and Srinivasa Ramanujam. This
phase, I consider the glorious phase of Indian science. The scientific
foundation laid by them always stimulated the later generations also.
This was also the beginning of the emergence of a confident India, in
spite of her subjugation. The second phase is the post-independence
phase of science and technology in India.
All of you know, in history, any country revolves itself initially
around a few stout and earnest knowledge giants. Particularly I took
interest to study the lives of three scientists, as I was interested in
their scientific and technological leadership qualities that focused on
the relationship of S&T and development of the nation. In the history
of India, there may be many but I was very close to these three great
personalities for one reason or the other. They are founders of three
great institutions. I worked in two of the institutions directly and one
in partnership. Dr D.S. Kothari, a Professor in Delhi University was
558 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
an outstanding Physicist and also an Astrophysicist. He is well known
for ionization of matter by pressure in cold compact objects like planets.
This theory is complementary to thermal ionization work done by Dr
Meghnad Saha, his guru. Dr Kothari set a scientific tradition in Indian
defence tasks when he became Scientific Adviser to Defence Minister
in 1948; He created a Board of Advisors to the Scientific Advisor
consisting of Dr. H.J. Bhaba, Dr. K.S. Krishnan and Dr. S.S. Bhatnagar.
Later the Board was renamed as Scientific Advisory Board with enlarged
He established the Defence Science Centre to do research in
electronic material, nuclear medicine and ballistic science. He is
considered as the architect of defence science in India. His race continued
and was followed up with momentum working and contributing in
the areas of strategic systems, electronic warfare systems, armaments
Now, let me discuss about Homi Jehangir Bhabha. He did research
in theoretical physics in Cambridge University. During 1930-1939,
Homi Bhabha carried out research relating to cosmic radiation. In
1939, he joined Sir C.V. Raman in IISc Bangalore. Later, he was
asked to start the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research with focus
on nuclear science and mathematical science, and established Atomic
Energy Commission in 1948. Multi-centres were born with his vision
in nuclear science to nuclear technology, nuclear power, nuclear devices
and nuclear medicine. These science institutions established multi-
technological centres, but basic science is the vital component.
Thirdly I will discuss about Prof Vikram Sarabhai, who was my
Guru, the youngest of the three and he worked with Sir C.V. Raman
in experimental cosmic ray research. Prof Sarabhai established Physical
Research Laboratory (PRL) Ahmedabad with space research as focus.
PRL was the cradle of Indian Space Programme. In later years he
became the Director of Space S&T Centre. The SSTC (1963) started
with launching sounding rockets for space atmospheric research. Prof.
Vikram Sarabhai unfurled the space mission for India in 1970 that
we should build Satellite Launch Vehicle capability, to put our
communication satellites in the geo-synchronous orbit and remote
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 559
sensing satellites in the polar orbit. Also, he envisaged that launch
vehicles built in India should be launched from Indian soil. This one
visionary thought led to intensive research and development in multiple
fields of science and space technology. Many of us had the fortune to
be part of Prof. Vikram Sarabhai's vision. Myself and my team
participated in India's first satellite launch vehicle programme to put
the satellite in the orbit. Today, India with her 20,000 scientific,
technological and support staff in multiple space research centres,
supported by about 300 industries and academic institutions, has the
capability to build any type of satellite launch vehicle to place remote
sensing, communication and meteorology satellites in different orbits,
and space application has become part of our daily life.
You have seen how visionaries of a nation bring about economic
transformation and technological change. I would like you to emulate
these visionaries, dream and work for transforming India into a
So far, friends, I have discussed the great tradition of science,
particularly physics on the day of discovery of Raman Effect. It is
important for us. I talked to you last year about the achievements of
Indian scientists in the year 2003. This is also very important to all of
us to know. There are hundreds of scientific laboratories and R&D
Institutions in space, defence and many other areas, and a number of
universities. It is time that our scientific, technological academic
institutions and universities should carry out an internal review and
assess for themselves where do they stand in relation to academic
institutions of excellence in the world. I will be very happy to discuss
this issue with academic experts.
My team from Rashtrapati Bhavan indeed made a great search
on the Internet and also scanned through Indian and foreign scientific
journals. The team also contacted the scientists directly through tele
conference. After analysis, I thought of sharing with you six scientific
research results of the year 2004 that will impact our society. Let me
First I would like to discuss about bio-pesticide development.
Development of safe and sustainable alternatives to chemical insecti-
560 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
cides is absolutely essential as it has become a liability for good soil.
A research mission has been taken up by International centre for Genetic
Engineering and Bio-technology to isolate a bacterium from soil
dwelling nematode, which is highly pathogenic to insects. Sustained
research and field trials during the last two years, at various locations
in the country, of the formulation consisting of bacterium has led to
successful optimized formulation resulting in a viable bio-pesticide.
As reported, the formulation is effective in agricultural and horticultural
insect pests like diamond back moth of cabbage and cauliflower, mealy
bugs of citrus fruits and grapes and termites in teak plantation. White
woolly aphid of sugar cane, which is a major factor in reducing the
sugar production of Maharastra, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh, is
effectively controlled by the bio-pesticide. Its efficacy is comparable
to the chemical insecticide. This scientific research leading to technology
has been transferred to a start-up bio-tech company Nirmal Seeds
Ltd and it is marketed under the brand name, BIO PRAHAR. I am
sure that this work will lead to improved food productivity in a very
Second achievement is the development of a drug for faster cure
of tuberculosis. Modem medicine has always relied on newer scientific
discoveries world over. Indian scientific research starts to focus on
finding solutions to our problems, which can later on be applied to
the people of other countries. In this regard, India has made a very
significant contribution in developing a dmg uniquely suitable for
Indian ambience. One of the achievements comes from a laboratory
of (CSIR) the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. CSIR
lab has developed a new therapeutic molecule for tuberculosis. This
molecule has shown the potential to cure TB in around 2 months, as
against the standard treatment of 6 to 8 months. This breakthrough is
very important as we have a number of TB patients. After completing
the pre-clinical studies, the molecule transformed into a dmg is planned
to undergo clinical trials in humans. It is commendable that the entire
development has been done as a public-private partnership involving
the Lupin, the three CSIR Laboratories, namely, Central Dmg Research
Institute, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology and National
Chemical Laboratory, and the University of Hyderabad.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 561
Third achievement is the development of a nano-tube filter. The
scientists from Banaras Hindu University have devised a simple method
to produce carbon nanotube filters that efficiently remove micro- to
nano-scale contaminants from water and heavy hydrocarbons from
petroleum. Made entirely of carbon nanotubes, the filters are easily
manufactured using a novel method for controlling the cylindrical
geometry of the structure. The work was supported in part by the
Ministry of Human Resource Development and Department of Science
and Technology in India.
The filters are hollow carbon cylinders several centimetres long
and one or two centimetres wide with walls just one-third to one-half
of a millimetre thick. They are produced by spraying benzene into a
tube-shaped quartz mould and heating the mould to 900 degrees C.
The nanotube composition makes the filters strong, reusable, and heat
resistant, and they can be cleaned easily for reuse. The carbon nanotube
filters offer a level of precision suitable for different applications.
The experiments demonstrated that the filters may be useful in producing
high-octane gasoline. They also can remove 25-nanometer-sized polio
viruses from water, as well as larger pathogens, such as E. coli and
Staphy-lo-coccus aau-re-us bacteria. The researchers believe this could
make the filters adaptable to micro fluidics applications that separate
chemicals in drug discovery.
This is a classic application of the latest in science - Nano
science - to age-old problem of water purification. If properly used,
this can help in lessening the burden in our drinking water missions
leading to the availability of safe drinking water that will result in
minimizing the water borne diseases.
Fourth area, I would like to talk about is Gene Chip for curing
heart diseases. Cardiomyopathy means "diseases of the heart muscle"
which leads to heart failure or sudden death. There are three main
types: Dilated, hypertrophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy. It progresses
since childhood and the onset of the disease varies according to the
family history. Although transplantation may be an effective strategy
in these patients, its implementation is hindered by availability of
donor as well as numerous ethical, social, economic and legal issues.
562 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Similarly the mechanical cardiac assist devices are also not cost-effective
for long-term usage in our population.
The Human Genome Project has increased the impact of genetics
in medical science and practice. Genetics of cardiomyopathy remain
unknown. Also, the molecular etiology is not known in many cases
of cardiomyopathies affecting children as well as adults, with an annual
incidence of 2-8 per 10,000 in the United States and Europe. Though
there are reports on association of mutations in nuclear genome and
cardiomyopathy, quite a number of cases do not show any such
mutations. As there is a close relationship between the cardiac muscle
contraction and energy metabolism, it is quite reasonable to speculate
the role of mitochondrial DNA variations as possible cause of these
cases. Recent reports have shown evidence in support of the role of
mitochondrial mutation in the pathogenesis of cardiomyopathies in
western population. There is no large sample study carried out so far
to find molecular etiology of cardiomyopathy in Indian population.
The scientists from International Centre for Biomedical Sciences
and Technology (Research & Applications), have reported several
novel mutations that could be the possible cause of the disease, and
some pathogenic mutations whose role is proved in other mitochondrial
diseases, by sequencing the five unrelated individuals with severe
cardiomyopathies. This is the first report of the mitochondrial DNA
analysis of the cardiac patients from the Indian subcontinent. Fortunately
the administering stem cell has found cure in AIIMS for the specific
Fifth Area is about the development of a novel detection kit,
NEVA-HIV to detect HIV (AIDS) in a drop of blood within three
minutes. It is a single step test in which a drop of blood is mixed with
a drop of a reagent on a glass slide. If the blood sample shows clumping,
it is positive for HIV. This clumping of blood can be easily seen with
the naked eye, hence the test is called the Naked Eye Visible Ag
glutination assay or NEVA. This test uses recombinant proteins
consisting of a monovalent fragment of an anti-human RBC monoclonal
antibody fused to a specific protein antigen derived from HIV. These
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 563
proteins cross-link RBCs in the presence of anti-HIV antibodies, which
are present in the blood of HIV infected individuals. The test uses
recombinant proteins consisting of NEVA-HIV in one of the very
few tests in the world that can be performed on whole blood, even
from a finger prick. Keeping in mind the practical constraints of HIV
testing in our country, NEVA-HIV is an instrument-free test. In addition,
the simplicity and rapidity of the test makes it suitable for use in a
primary health centre of a village even in a remote part of our country.
The test has been evaluated at several national reference centres
and has been found to have high sensitivity and specificity. This novel
scientific development has been carried out by the faculty members
of Department of Biochemistry, University of Delhi in collaboration
with the Department of Bio-technology and Cadila Pharmaceuticals
Sixth area is the discovery of binary millisecond pulsar. A pulsar
is the remnant of a star which exploded, leaving behind a sphere made
up of neutrons just 20 kms in size but weighing more than the sun.
The pulsar emits a beam of radio waves which is seen from the earth
as a pulse every time it rotates. These waves are very weak, when
they reach the earth. In order to detect the pulsar, one needs the Giant
Metre-wave Radio Telescope (GMRT). The Tata Institute of
Fundamental research (TIFR) has built the largest radio telescope in
the world in rural area near the village of Khodad, 80 km from Pune.
Because of the unique capabilities of our GMRT, scientists from all
over the world including USA and Canada visit the centre to conduct
collaborative experiments. Our scientists played a leading role in the
recent discovery of a new "Binary millisecond pulsar". Astronomy
had been the strong point of ancient Indian science. Discoveries like
the one that has been made by the scientists of the National Centre
for Radio Astrophysics of TIFR, is an important contribution for Indian
I have given you a brief account of six scientific results achieved
by our scientists in the year 2004. A nation of billion people will
certainly have many more achievements that will justify her being
564 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
ranked third in the world in terms of scientific manpower. The six
illustrations, I gave above, are more to show that the Indian science
is in the ascending trajectory. The Indian science fabric is very vast
and all encompassing. The Indian science awaits all of you, youth to
join her in the journey of progress and excitement. Definitely Indian
science particularly the experience of experienced scientists should
be available to inspire the youth who aspire to take up science as
Science has helped us to increase food productivity, create the
white and green revolution, improve communication, produce electricity
using nuclear science, enhance the quality of life, attempt novel things
of use to humanity and leading us towards a healthier and happy nation.
Thanks to science we live longer, have reduced infant deaths, and
have overcome diseases more effectively. When I was a child one of
the dreaded diseases in India was small pox. It hit every village and
town, killed millions and left millions with pockmarks on their faces.
* Science came to our rescue. Now small pox is history, a disease of
Can we apply science to eradicate the poverty, remove illiteracy,
make all Indians healthy and make it a partner in generating wealth
to the nation for transforming India into a developed nation by the
year 2020 ? The answer to the question is "yes" since the development
of the nation has to be done through application of technology since
non-linear growth can only be achieved through technology. The
development of technology needs science. If we desire to nurture the
nation, we have to nurture science and scientists. Let us all work
together to promote a scientific temper among our youth who are the
greatest partners in the transformation process.
Attracting Youth for Career in Science
J AM INDEED delighted to inaugurate the seminar on "Attracting
Young people to Careers in Science" organized by the Indian Physics
Association on the occasion of the International Year of Physics -
2005.1 greet the organizers, scientists, engineers, distinguished guests
and the other participants in the seminar. Keeping in mind the main
theme of the seminar, I would like to discuss with you about: "Challenge
to science: Attracting the youth".
I would like to narrate an incident which happened during a
programme for honouring Prof. Norman E. Borlaug with Dr. M.S.
Swaminathan award, at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi on the 15th of
March 2005. Prof. Borlaug, at the age of 91 was in the midst of all
the praise showered on him from everybody. First, he talked about
India's advancement in the agricultural science and agricultural
production and the present status of agricultural science in India. He
turned to the dais; he talked about Dr. M.S. Swaminathan and a political
visionary late Shri C. Subramaniam who were the prime architects of
First Green Revolution in India. He also recalled about Dr. V. Kurien
who was the father of White Revolution in India. Then he turned to
the audience and started identifying scientists such as Dr. Raja Ram,
a wheat specialist, Dr S.K. Vasal, a maize specialist, and Dr. B. R.
Barwale, a seed specialist who was contributing in the agricultural
advancement in India and abroad. Dr. Borlaug introduced them to
the audience by asking them to stand and ensured that the audience
cheered and greeted them with great enthusiasm. Here, I noticed a
unique way of a 91 year old Nobel Laureate, who remembered and
recognized all the key contributors to the agriculture mission irrespective
of their position. This lesson, I would like the Indian scientific community
to observe and follow, while dealing with all youngs dentists.
Address at the Inaguration of the Seminar on Attracting Young people to Careers
in Science, Indian Physics Association IIT, New Delhi, 31 March 2005
566 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Let me tell you about another incident. Recently, my friend Dr.
Vasant Gowariker sent me an executive summary of The Fertilizer
Encyclopedia prepared by him and his team. The comment by Dr.
Norman E. Borlaug on this document is noteworthy. I quote: "Asian
farmers in particular must now judiciously increase their per hectare
use of fertilizer, looking for greater efficiency in use and also in dealing
with deficiencies of secondary and minor elements of the soil." Unquote.
This is how he sets the targets and provides encouragement for pursuing
science across the world.
Another unique personality whom I remember, when I talk about
science is Prof. C.N.R. Rao. I have visited his laboratory. He is a
pioneer and an example of leading from the front. His research started
from structure of molecules and that opened newer frontiers in surface
sciences and more recently in nano particles and nano materials. He
is one of the highly decorated Indian scientists. He is a motivator par
excellence and pursues science with passion. Among the many awards
he has received for his contribution in science, I would like to particularly
mention the prestigious 'Dan David Prize' given to him by Dan David
Prize Foundation headquartered at Tel Aviv University for his
contribution towards the future time dimension in the filed of material
science. In addition, he is the first recipient of'India Science Award'
announced on 28 February 2005.
Another important scientist in the field of medicine, I would
like to recall is Dr. P. Venugopal, Director, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi. In his laboratory, he pioneered stem cell research
in the field of cardiology. In one of the cardiac cases, where conventional
medical and surgical treatment were ineffective because of the affliction
of the heart muscle, stem cells implantation into the diseased heart
muscles had been applied in order to improve the function of heart
muscle. This kind of application of this procedure is the latest and
very few cases have been done in the world, the first time in India.
This is expected to open new frontiers in the treatment of patients for
regeneration of heart muscles, thereby giving new hope for the patients
suffering end stage heart disease. The commitment of Dr. P. Venugopal
for research ultimately results in saving hundreds of lives.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 567
I have mentioned these names only to assure ourselves that the
Indian science has great future.
I remember an incident with Prof. Vikram Sarabhai during the
1960's. There were a few scientists and technologists, whom Dr.
Sarabhai nurtured. I would like to share with you how he nurtured
them. Whenever he came to Trivandrum, I used to discuss with him
the proposal for the development of Composite Products. At that time
I was in the initial stages of my career as rocket engineer, with less
than two years of experience in ISRO.
Similarly, there was Dr. S.C. Gupta, a specialist in guidance and
Dr. Amba Rao a specialist in Aerospace structures. In spite of our
being just introduced into the organisation with a few years of
experience, noticing our interest in development of certain materials
and systems Dr. Sarabhai funded for the creation of laboratories. He
created fibre composite laboratory based on my proposal, which later
became Reinforced Plastic Centre. He created Gyro laboratory centred
on the expertise of Dr. Gupta, which later became Guidance Laboratory
and space structures laboratory centred around Dr. Amba Rao, which
later became advanced dynamics group. These centres became the
centres of excellence and incubated many advanced technology missions
that fed critical inputs to space programme. Once the potential of the
young scientist is understood, the heads of the organisation must invest
on them boldly irrespective of the positions of the scientists and their
age considerations. If this philosophy is pursued with sincerity the
research would flourish and youth would be encouraged to embrace
In India, science and technology took a two-phase progress with
the momentum created in 1930s, by the great scientists of international
repute. They gave the country the confidence. We may remember the
pioneering contributions to science made by Chandrasekhar
Subramaniam for his Chandrasekhar limit and black hole, Sir C.V.
Raman for his discovery of the "Raman effect", Srinivasa Ramanujan
for his contributions towards number theory, J.C. Bose in the area of
microwaves, and Meghnad Saha for "Thermo-Ionization Equation".
568 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
This phase, I consider the glorious phase of Indian science. This scientific
foundation laid by them always triggered the later generations also.
The unique similarities of all these scientists are that they had dedicated
their entire life for the cause of scientific research and the spirit of
inquiry for the fields that they have chosen amidst all the hurdles and
problems in their life as well as their career. Science always gives
life time missions to the scientists, and then only success comes. They
have not deviated towards the other worldly prospects or towards
their own career advancements. This quality helped them to make
singular contributions for the benefit of science and the world. It is a
question of dedication, commitment and understanding and also the
environment for research in science, which gives birth to the scientists
for the nation. They inspired many later generation scientists including
G.N. Ramachandran, the originator of triple-helix.
Let me now discuss how India has attracted a large number of
scientists and engineers towards drawing the road map for achieving
self-reliance in critical technologies in defence, space and atomic energy.
In history, any country reposes its confidence initially in a few
stout and earnest knowledge giants. Particularly I took interest to study
the lives of three scientists, as I was interested in their scientific and
technological leadership qualities that focused on the relationship of
S&T and development of the nation. In the history of India, there
may be many but I was very close to these three great personalities
for one reason or the other. They are founders of three great institutions.
I worked in two of the institutions directly and one in partnership. Dr
D.S. Kothari, a Professor in Delhi University was an outstanding
Physicist with special interest in Astrophysics. He is well known for
ionization of matter by pressure in cold compact objects like planets.
This theory is complementary to the epoch making theory of thermal
ionization of his guru Dr Meghnad Saha. Dr D.S. Kothari set a scientific
tradition in Indian defence tasks when he became Scientific Adviser
to Defence Minister in 1948. The first thing he did was to establish
the Defence Science Centre to do research in electronic material, nuclear
medicine and ballistic science. He is considered as the architect of
defence science in India. His race continued and was followed up
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 569
with a momentum working and contributing in the areas of strategic
systems, electronic warfare systems, armaments and life sciences.
Now, let me discuss about Homi Jehangir Bhabha. He did research
in theoretical physics in Cambridge University. During 1930-1939,
Homi Bhabha carried out research relating to cosmic radiation. In
1939, he joined Sir C.V. Raman in IISc Bangalore. Later, he was
asked to start the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research with focus
on nuclear science and mathematical science. He subsequently
established the Indian Atomic Energy Commission in 1948. Multi
centres were born with his vision in nuclear science to nuclear
technology, nuclear power, nuclear devices and nuclear medicine.
These science institutions established multi-technological centres, but
basic science was the vital component.
The youngest of the three was Prof Vikram Sarabhai and he worked
with Sir C.V. Raman in experimental cosmic ray. Prof Sarabhai
established the Physical Research Laboratory in Ahmedabad with Space
research as focus. In later years he became the Director of Space S&T
Centre. The SSTC (1963) started with the launching of sounding rockets
for space atmospheric research. His vision transformed Indian Space
Research Organisation (ISRO) into multiple space technology centres.
These centres are responsible for development leading to launch of
PSLV in the sun synchronous orbit. And we have also witnessed a
launching of GSLV in the geo-synchronous orbit with communication
I have talked about the three personalities, Dr. D.S. Kothari, Dr.
Homi Baba and Dr. Vikram Sarabhai. All the three of them were
physicists, who went on to build huge S&T institutions that became
the home of more than 20,000 young scientists and engineers and
also the kindler of their innovativeness. I believe strongly that if the
three scientists had gone on to concentrate only on science, at least
one of them would have got the Nobel Prize, but India would not
have had the advantage of having the atomic energy, space and defence
research establishments in the country with this magnitude. We must
take the message and the mission of successful scientists such as Raman,
570 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Chandrasekar, Kothari, Homi Bhaba and Sarabhai to the youth so
that they will understand the various ways by which one could contribute
to the growth of the nation, if they take science as a career. This
would surely attract many young people towards science.
As soon as we became independent, the country was infested
with problems to bring in urgently needed technologies for steel, civil
structures, hydro dams and thermal power stations. Our concentration
was directed towards solving burning problems like feeding the
population, providing water, shelter and health care. The political
visionaries at that time, in spite of our having a very weak economy,
decided to wisely set up what ultimately has become the science base
of our country such as Atomic Energy, Space, CSIR, DRDO, DST
etc. The country also setup the powerful educational base including
the creation of IITs and many universities, which had a unique blend
of science and technology.
Today the country has become one of the strongest in the world
in terms of scientific manpower in capability and maturity. Our economy
has also become strong. Hence, we are in a position not only to
understand the technologies that we may have to borrow, but also to
create our own technologies with extensive scientific inputs of
indigenous origin. This, in fact, would do a value addition. In many
areas such as pharma, we are delivering to the world, products which
are backed by large amount of R&D. Basically we have come a long
way since our independence, from mere buyers of technology to those
who have made science and technology as an important contributor
for national development and societal transformation. In a world where
the powers are determined by their share of the world's knowledge,
reflected by patents, papers and so on, the WTO starts to play a crucial
role in the economic development. It is important for India to put all
her acts together to become a continuous innovator and creator of
science and technology-intensive products. The science that we do
today must have the innovativeness and the foresight and the vision
for it to be the centre of the technology that we develop tomorrow for
In the last three decades, we have witnessed an unstinted growth
in miniaturization of IT products in the world. Central to this is the
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 571
silicon technology. The feature size of the transistors has been decreasing
relentlessly. It is predicted that the miniaturization using silicon micro
electronics will find its plateau and its limit will be reached within
the next decade. The world is on the lookout for an alternative to
silicon. The transformation from microelectronics to the nano science
and nano technology is knocking at our doors. The endless alternatives
include molecular transistors, quantum computing, nano electronics
and so on. India has the good science base needed for being a pioneer
in making this breakthrough a reality.
In addition to the above, the challenges facing Indian scientists
in the coming decades will be the development of anti vaccine for
HIV/AIDS and development of seeds for agricultural products which
requires minimum water and can provide high yield per hectare to
compensate for the reduced availability of land. Apart from this, there
is a need to work on thorium based nuclear power plants, integrated
mission for stem cell research, launching of hypersonic reusable launch
vehicle and take discoveries and innovations to provide better quality
of life to the differently challenged people. These are some of the
challenges facing the scientific community in the coming decades.
I would like to make the following suggestions for attracting the
young people to careers in Science.
1. It is essential to have an assured career in science for a certain
number of high quality committed scientists with aptitude
towards research. There should be a minimum annual intake
of about 300 M.Sc and 100 Ph.D scientists with proper
emoluments and assured career growth in the organisations
such as ISRO, DRDO, Atomic Energy, CSIR, DST and the
Universities. The private and government funded universities
must be encouraged to appoint M.Sc and Ph.D who have
been selected through a nationally co-ordinated competitive
selection process. This will be a great motivator for the science
students and also their parents for pursuing advanced courses
in science. This is the first and foremost need for attracting
young people to career in science - an assurance to the youth
and the parents that the future is secure, once they take science
572 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
2. The experienced scientists and policy makers of the
organisations must recognize the talents available in the
organisation irrespective of the position and empower the
young scientists to create state-of-the art laboratories once
they have concrete thoughts and vision. Prof Vikram Sarabhai
in the initial stages of ISRO brought in a culture of
management which encouraged and satisfied the vision of
the young scientists who collectively succeeded in making
the mission of the organisation a reality.
3. Universities and Research and Development institutions must
encourage and facilitate the young scientists to write quality
research papers in frontier areas and in prestigious journals.
They should also facilitate the youth to present the papers
in national and international seminars and symposiums which
will enable them to assess their standard against international
benchmarks. Encouraging youth to be lead authors while
publishing the joint research would be a very good gesture
that the youngsters .would cherish for many years.
4. Based on my experience during my interaction with 600,000
students, I realize that they are looking for role models,
whom they would like to follow after their 10+2 career.
Approximately 7 million students appear for plus two
examinations every year, out of which 3 million students
are from the science stream. To attract this youth towards a
career in science, we need many novel ideas. The youth
must be made to understand the beauty of doing science,
the pleasure of doing science and the ultimate bliss when
the results of science make you understand the nature, master
it, control it and finally make things that improve the quality
of life of the humankind. Every one of us scientists must
pledge that we will at least spend sometime visiting the
schools to ignite the young minds by recounting our own
My best wishes to the organizers of this conference for fruitful
discussions and generation of ideas for attracting young people with
passion and aptitude for a life of science and in science.
Space Missions - Thinking Beyond
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in the symposium on Launch
Vehicles: Past, Present and Way Ahead on the occasion of the Silver
Jubilee celebrations of the first successful launch of SLV-3. It was a
great day 25 years ago that India became an exclusive member of the
Space Club when SLV-3 E02 placed the Rohini Satellite in the near
earth orbit. ISRO has come a long way today heralding self-reliance
in space technology with capability to design and develop any type
of launch vehicle and spacecraft. All of you assembled here and
many others have contributed for making India a Space Power. I greet
all of you for participating in this great event. On this occasion we
remember the pioneering contributions of Dr. Vikram Sarabhai, Prof.
Satish Dhawan, Dr. Brahmprakash, Shri M.R. Kurup and Dr. S.
I was asking myself what thoughts I could share with such
important space community. I know the dream of the people of India.
I am also aware about their pain and sorrow. We are one sixth of the
world's population, and at least two thirds of the global population is
perhaps going through the same type of crisis and turmoil. Energy,
water, health care, education and employment potential are the important
requirements for the people to live with prosperity. The world at
large needs technology inputs for meeting these needs. Space technology
has a role. Therefore, I am going to discuss with you the Vision for
Space Missions to find solution to these requirements using space
India's space, missiles and aeronautics programmes in the last
four decades have led to successful missions and accomplishments.
Address at the Symposium on Launch Vehicles : Past, Present and Way Ahead at
VSSC, Thiruvananthapuram, 28 July 2005
574 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
India is today self-reliant in space technology. It has evolved operational
PSLV and GSLV which could provide competitive launch services.
In the missile programme, India has operational strategic systems
using critical technologies developed by indigenous efforts with multiple
institutions partnership. The recent breakthrough has been BRAHMOS
- a supersonic cruise missile, the best of its kind in the world attracting
large-scale exports. Advanced Light Helicopter, Light Combat Aircraft,
SARAS, IJT and Advanced Remotely Piloted Vehicles have established
the aircraft design capability. Most of them are in production and
The vision of Dr. Sarabhai and Prof. Satish Dhawan with two
space profiles 1970-1980 and 1980-1995 respectively were the
blueprints and today those visions have become reality. With those
space profiles of our visionary leaders and with the integrated technology
strength of the nation, we can march further to envision new missions.
Let us see the glimpses of space technology benefits.
Satellite remote sensing is vital for mapping of different ground
resources like water, minerals, agriculture, urban planning, coastal
regions, forestry, engineering geology and mineral exploration.
Regional research centres in the many states / regions of our country
and the multiple villages are utilizing the data coming from the satellite.
This large potential must be effectively used.
In many places on our planet, we experience severe disasters
like earthquakes, tsunami, cyclone resulting in loss of life, loss of
wealth, and in some cases it destroys the decades of progress made
by the country and its valuable civilizational heritage. India has
earthquake problems periodically in certain regions. US, Japan, Turkey,
Iran and many other countries also suffer due to earthquakes.
Earthquake/tsunami is a sub terrain phenomenon and predicting
this from space observations would be a great challenge. Space scientists
of multiple nations should work with determination to use satellite
deep penetration images to predict the earthquake or shock wave
propagation. Other possibilities are precise geodynamic measurement
of strain accumulation by satellite to detect pre-slip, and electromagnetic
phenomena prior to final rupture.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 575
It is hoped that well organized electromagnetic monitoring may
provide unique observational information on the pre-slips. Atmospheric/
ionospheric anomalies still remains unresolved. Post earthquake disaster
recovery, communication and damage assessment are also areas where
space technology can quickly make its impact. We have to mount
research programmes for evolving a systematic methodology for
determining the effects leading to earthquakes and tsunami. Space
technology can be used for forecasting and modelling of volcanic
eruptions, land slides, avalanche, flash floods, storm surge, hurricane
and tornadoes. We should also integrate the various efforts with the
National Authority for Disaster Management.
Satellite communication network has helped India in providing
education and health care in the form of tele-education and tele-medicine.
The prime objective of the EDUSAT programme is to provide support
to education through low-cost ground segments and to reach the un
reached people of India in every nook and comer. EDUSAT is specially
configured to have multiple beams covering different regions of India.
EDUSAT provides communication coverage through five regional
beams and a national beam. This system will be primarily for school,
college and higher level of education; however it will also support
non-formal education. EDUSAT is expected to provide 150,000 ground
terminals in its full capacity.
Like tele-education, tele-medicine can help in a big way in bringing
modern health care treatment within the reach of remote villages. I
am happy to know that ISRO has used satellite network to connect
remote villages to major hospitals wherein a patient's condition is
diagnosed by a specialist doctor and his views communicated through
These links would be the window to the world of knowledge for
our villages and also to reap the benefits of our e-governance, tele
education, tele-medicine, e-commerce and e-judiciary initiatives. I
visualize establishment of village knowledge centres in all Panchayats
to empower the villagers with the knowledge and to act as a nodal
centre for knowledge connectivity for the villagers. The knowledge
centre will provide to the villagers the real time information about
576 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
the market for their products from the agriculture, cottage industry,
fisheries and other rural industries in their locality as well as national
markets. This also will provide direct quality employment to over
one million people who will be instrumental in promoting higher level
of wealth generation in our rural sector.
Due to various aerospace programmes, multiple state-of-the-art
technologies got developed. Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD)
emerged as core strength for India with advanced software codes and
super computing capability to optimize configurations for guided
missiles, LCA and launch vehicles. CAD / CAM has become the
order of the day for Aerospace systems, and virtual reality systems
have been developed which reduce the design and product realization
time by as much as 40%. India has developed fibre optic and ring
laser gyros with better accuracies, micro processors, microwave
components and devices, phase shifters, onboard computers and
foundries for making VLSI and MMIC components thus making India
self-dependent. In the area of propulsion, ISRO ' s large solid propulsion
booster giving 500 tonnes of thrust, liquid propulsion in DRDO and
ISRO, and the development effort of cryogenic engines, established
a sound base in propulsion technology.
Emerging technologies such as MEMS, nano, information
technology, biotechnology, space research, hypersonics and high power
lasers and microwave will be dominating the future in every field
and applications. The advancements in material science and technology
will give a major thrust to the realization of advanced aerospace systems.
We are today at the convergence of nano, bio and information
technologies that will lead to new generation aerospace devices and
The advances in the fields of micro-electromechanical systems
(MEMS) and nanotechnology have paved the way to the evolution in
the ability to manufacture smaller and smarter products. MEMS bring
together microelectronics with micromachining technology, allowing
unprecedented levels of functionality and reliability to be placed on a
small silicon chip. Nanotechnology, on the other hand, is the science
of assembling atoms and molecules that respond to stimuli, with
dimensions of the order of a nanometre (one in billion of a metre).
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 577
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) technology will have
a profound impact in the aerospace field with the miniaturization of
electronics. These tiny machines, often only a few micrometres in
size, are already replacing conventional larger equipment. Given their
microscopic size and weight, MEMS can use higher frequency and
bandwidths and can be slipped into tighter and even more
environmentally stressed locations. Once in production, unit prices
are lower; once in operation, power consumption is negligible. Examples
are pressure sensors, fluid flow sensors, magnetic sensors, gyros,
accelerometers and more. MEMS is also expected to play a significant
role in dramatically reducing the cost of space exploration with
substantial savings in weight and increased reliability and functionality.
Eventually, MEMS could lead to the development of extremely low
Molecular nano technology has enormous potential for future
aerospace systems. Research has shown that newly discovered class
of molecules, particularly carbon nano tubes built from graphite sheets
curved into a wide variety of close shapes, may lead to tougher, high
temperature materials that can survive in vacuum and other harsh
environments. Carbon nano tubes are normal form of carbon with
remarkable electrical and mechanical properties. It is hoped that such
materials could revolutionize electronic design and open the space
frontier by radically lowering the cost of launch to orbit.
Carbon nano tubes reinforced with polymer matrix will result in
composites which are super strong, light weight, small and intelligent
structures in the field of material science. This has tremendous aerospace
Molecular switches and circuits along with nano cell will pave
the way for the next generation computers. Ultra dense computer
memory coupled with excellent electrical performance will result in
low power, low cost, nano size and yet faster assemblies.
: With the emergence of nanotechnology, there is convergence of
nano-bio-info-technologies resulting in new devices which have wider
applications in structure, electronics, health care and space systems.
578 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
The era of wood and bio-mass is almost nearing its end. So too
the age of oil and natural gas would soon be over even within the
next few decades. The world energy forum has predicted that fossil
based oil, coal and gas reserves will last another five to ten decades.
Nuclear power especially a breakthrough in nuclear fusion may
be a path. Concerted effort is called for for the conversion of thorium
fuel to enriched uranium, for nuclear power is a must for self-reliance.
Hydrogen fuel and solar rays are the two modes to get clean power.
The solar rays, when passed though CNT-based solar photovoltaic
cells utilizing nano-rods, will give efficiency of more than 50% from
the present efficiency of less than 20%. Hydrogen in combination
with fuel cell can replace fossil fuels used in automobiles. Hydrogen
is a zero emission fuel facilitating pollution control and the process
is regenerative. CNT multi-walled structures can store the hydrogen
More than 70% of earth surface is having water; but only one
per cent is available as fresh water for drinking purposes. Currently,
more than half of the world's six billion population is without access
to safe drinking water and sanitation. 20,000 children are affected
every day due to polluted drinking water, more than the total mortality
due to cancer, AIDS, wars and accidents. By the year 2030 when the
world population touches eight billion, as many as seven billion will
be living under conditions of moderate, high and extreme water scarcity.
There is a fourfold method towards providing safe and fresh drinking
water. The first is to re-distribute water supply; the second is to seek
new sources; the third is to save and reduce demand for water; and
the fourth is to recycle used water supplies.
In the programme of networking of rivers, remote sensing satellites
can survey and evolve optimum water routes, environmental mapping
and afforestation requirements, and continuous monitoring of the
networked water flow through all seasons. This may require a dedicated
satellite for our networked river systems.
Remote sensing satellites can provide the images showing the
locations of the watersheds. From these watersheds, fresh water can
be generated employing CNT based membrane through reverse osmosis
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 579
process. Another method of using space for solving the water crisis
can be the use of solar power satellites. Energy obtained from such
satellites can be stored in high energy CNT solar cells which provide
the power to desalination plants for large-scale drinking water supplies
Having missed the opportunity of the first industrial revolution,
India is still a developing country. Now the developed countries are
racing towards moon and Mars which may be the next industrial
revolution. India has the opportunity now to join this exclusive club
of nations to establish industry in moon and Mars. The technological
Manufacturing and mining in reduced gravity.
Harnessing Helium-3 in moon for future energy, using
Using dry ice deposits in moon and Mars as source of fuel
Extending life of satellites in orbit through refuelling and
Using the moon as space transportation hub.
As the space missions are increasing with larger payloads, it is
essential to reduce the cost of access to space by several orders of
magnitude. Such a reduction can enable the global space community
to move out of the present era of information collection missions into
an era of mass movement missions. They can find solutions for energy,
water and mineral crises. Mankind will continue to live on earth for
many billion years. We need good life for our generations. Therefore,
it is necessary to bring resources the earth needs from other planets.
Integrated aerospace technology strength in multiple S&T
organizations would lead to better capacity utilization, and the creation
of low cost space transportation. We have to evolve innovative design
concepts for both small as well as large payloads into space. Both
single and two-stage to orbit RLV concepts can be examined. The
580 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
goal here is to reduce the cost of access to space by one to two orders
of magnitude. Even a scientific breakthrough, for example, in air
breathing propulsion system may lead to a space transportation
revolution. The world space community has a huge stake in such
breakthrough research in advanced inter-disciplinary and inter-
institutional collaboration. A concerted effort is thus needed to quickly
demonstrate the technology for low cost access to space. ISRO takes
the lead in bringing the space community together.
The global space industry has had a forty-year period of
unprecedented growth and prosperity. The geo-stationary orbit is nearly
full, and new earth orbits need study and exploration, especially use
of small satellites in equatorial low earth orbit. Currently, global space
industry has a capacity to launch over 200 tonnes of satellites every
year. However, the forecast is that projected demand will consume
less than half of this established capacity. Thus a bitter price war is
on to capture this limited market.
The Indian concept of Hyperplane, a fully reusable system is an
innovation in rocketry providing a payload fraction of 15%, drastically
reducing the launch cost. The concept of mass addition in space has
been appreciated worldwide and a few countries have started working
on the heat exchanger for on-board generation of liquid oxygen. There
is an urgent need to progress the cost-effective SSTO hypersonic plane
With the growing space efforts, the coming years will have a
dominance of reusable launch vehicle. They will provide cost-effective
transportation of heavy payloads in order to construct large structures
in space. The future needs will be solar power satellites for generation
of electric power, exploration of planets, mining in moon and Mars
In the last 25 years, Indian space, missile and aircraft technologies
have matured and have tremendous integrated potential for developing
world class newer systems. While we are celebrating this silver jubilee,
we must look forward to missions for the next 25 years. Therefore, I
suggest the following space missions:
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 581
1. Manned Space Missions to Moon and Mars and establishment
2. Cost-effective space transportation systems using Hypersonic
3. Harnessing Space energy for power and drinking water
4. Developing Solar Sail for inter planetary mission
5. Integrated Disaster Management - Role of space technology
6. Refuelling, Repair and Maintenance of Satellites in Geo
7. Operational Indian Navigational Satellites
8. International "Youth Power" connectivity satellite
Future space missions throw open new opportunities and challenges
to the scientific community and the youth of India. Use this opportunity
to make the nation great.
Thinking beyond our planet is an essential trait. The thought
itself elevates the person. The person is transformed into a creative
state. Creativity indeed is the foundation of discovery and inventions.
I recall the great saying of Maharishi Pathanjali in Yoga Sutra in
"When you are inspired by some great
purpose, some extraordinary project, all your
thoughts break their bounds. Your mind transcends
limitations, your consciousness expands in every
direction, and you find yourself in a new, great
and wonderful world. Dormant forces, faculties
and talents come alive, and you discover yourself
to be a greater person by far than you ever dreamt
Space has to become another place. This calls for cost-effective
and reliable space transportation and manned missions.
Electromagnet Spectrum : Friend of
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of the General
Assembly of the International Union of Radio Science (URSI). My
greetings to the organizers, scientists, educationists, technologists and
distinguished participants especially delegates coming from various
parts of the planet. I particularly greet Dr. A.P. Mitra for his pioneering
contribution to radio science. The domain of URSI extends throughout
the solar system and out among the galaxies. I am sure that when
man reaches the outermost limit of the observable universe he will be
assisted by means of radio for communicating with earth from the
space platform for navigation and control using electro-magnetic waves
envisaged by Maxwell, J.C. Bose and Marconi about a century ago.
In the eight decades of the existence of URSI, this is the first time the
General Assembly is being held in New Delhi and offers an excellent
opportunity to the radio scientists particularly young scientists to interact
with international experts on state-of-the-art subjects. I have selected
the topic "Electromagnet Spectrum: A Friend of the Humanity".
When I see you friends, scientists and technologists of different
disciplines connected with the electromagnetic spectrum, belonging
to India and different countries assembled here, I am reminded of an
event which took place on November 21, 1963, when I was a rocket
engineer at Thumba. This was a very important day in the history of
India's space programme. On that day, the first sounding rocket from
India was launched from Thumba with international co-operation.
The rocket and payload was integrated in the Thumba Equatorial Rocket
The rocket carried the sodium vapour payload to study the upper
atmospheric winds and Longmuir wave probe to study the upper
Address at the Inauguration of General Assembly of International Union of Radio
Science (URSI), New Delhi, 23 October 2005
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 583
atmospheric electro jet. This first experiment paved the way for many
sounding rocket experiments, and TERLS was dedicated to the
international scientific community for the unique experiments in the
electromagnetic jet, as India was uniquely placed near electromagnetic
equator to study electro jet and related phenomena in the ionosphere.
The 1963 rocket launch from Thumba was my first experience with
radio propagation and related studies. The starting of Thumba Equatorial
Rocket Launching Station (TERLS) was the seeding of India's space
programme. Since Prof Vikram Sarabhai was the founder of the Physical
Research Laboratory at Ahmedabad which was spearheading the space
research, TERLS became the laboratory for space experiments.
Here I would like to mention the contribution of Prof Vikram
Sarabhai who worked on experimental cosmic ray, Dr. Homi Jegangir
Bhabha who carried out research relating to cosmic radiation and Dr.
Kothari who is well known for his work on ionization on matter by
pressure in cold compact objects like planets. Apart from their
contribution in their areas of specialization, Prof Vikram Sarabhai
sowed the seeds for ISRO, Dr. Homi Jegangir Bhabha, architect of
nuclear science, created the Department of Atomic Energy and Dr.
Kothari was the architect of defence science in India. We are proud
of the contribution made by these three physicists in building three
great scientific and technological institutions to nurture and grow science
and technology in our country. Today the space programme through
its sounding rocket programme and geosynchronous satellite programme
is contributing for India's communication covering the major
In the early days of space programme, for overseas
communications, we used to have wireless communication link between
Trivandrum and Mumbai for onward connectivity to the rest of the
country and outside world. Similarly, in the early phase of missile
programme, the communication link between Hyderabad and Chandipur,
Balasore was also through wireless sets. In fact, the entire operational
communication systems between Wheeler Island, Main Land, Balasore,
SHAR, Down Range Ships and Car Nicobar were through HF wireless
communication links. These communication facilities made me
understand the value of robust noise-free radio communications and
584 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
the role of scientists and engineers in realizing these systems for real
Recently, I participated in the award ceremony of Shankar's
International Children's Competition at New Delhi. There I found
the visualization of a 13 year old girl named Aardhra Krishna on
how the earth's civilization will look like around 3000 AD. In her
imagination, the citizens are forced to migrate to Mars and have made
Mars the home to a flourishing civilization. This advanced civilization,
which was man made, comes suddenly under threat created by nature
in the form of an asteroid of Jupiter. The asteroid from Jupiter orbit
was coming towards Mars and Mars was in danger of extinction. The
scientists on Mars come up with a very innovative plan of a barrage
of nuclear cannons to attack the oncoming asteroid. The bombardment
destroys the asteroid and the year 3000 sees a Martian civilization
surviving from the fury of the nature by an innovative scientific
application. What a wonderful scientific and technological thinking
of the young mind? Will it all be possible without the availability of
radio science which transmits large amount of information encompassing
the entire solar system? When I was admiring this imagination of the
young student, a real time space experiment took place that gave some
meaning to the imagination of the youth.
On 4th July 2005 one important event took place in space. That
was the impact of the NASA spacecraft called "Deep Impact" smashing
into the comet Tempel-I, with enough force to create a football stadium
sized crater with a depth of a 14 storey building. The spacecraft was
navigated through a ground control system by an Indian, Shyam
Bhaskaran - the "Deep Impact" travelled 431 million kms in 172
days escaping from the earth orbit and intercepted the comet at a
straight distance from earth at 134 million km. The comet was orbiting
around the Sun every five and half years. This is a landmark in radio
communications and space exploration.
This event is an important milestone to develop standardized
technique for combating asteroids which may hit the earth in future.
One such large asteroid (1950 AD) is predicted with certain probability
to hit the earth on March 16, 2880 AD and nearly one third of the
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 585
earth would be damaged. Like the "Deep Impact" many spacecraft
will be required to be sent with high energy material particles to divert
or break the asteroid to move it out of the dangerous orbit. All this is
possible only if we have a reliable robust radio communication system.
One of the important areas of application of radio science in
India is the discovery of binary millisecond pulsar. A pulsar is the
remnant of a star which exploded, leaving behind a sphere made up
of neutrons just 20 km in size but weighing more than the sun. The
pulsar emits a beam of radio wave which is seen from the earth as a
pulse every time it rotates. These waves are very weak when they
reach the earth. In order to detect the pulsar, one needs facilities like
the Giant Meter Wave Radio Telescope (GMRT). The Tata Institute
of Fundamental Research (TIFR) has built this largest radio telescope
in the world in the rural area near the village of Khodad, 80 km from
Pune. Because of the unique capabilities of our GMRT, scientists
from all over the world, including USA and Canada, visit the centre
to conduct collaborative experiments. Our scientists played a leading
role in the recent discovery of a new "Binary millisecond pulsar".
Discoveries like the one that has been made by the scientists of the
National Centre for Radio Astrophysics of TIFR, are an important
contribution for our radio science. Particularly I greet the team led by
In many places on our planet, we experience severe earthquakes
resulting in loss of life, loss of wealth and in some cases it destroys
the decades of progress made by the country and its valuable
civilizational heritage. India has earthquake problems periodically in
certain regions. Recently, in our state of Jammu and Kashmir and the
neighbouring country, there was an earthquake. US, Japan, Turkey,
Iran and many other countries also suffer due to earthquakes.
Earthquake is a sub terrain phenomenon and predicting this from
space observations would be a great challenge. An earthquake
phenomenon in broader sense starts to produce some precursors before
the final rupture, although this precursor-generating pre-rupture stage
is not usually regarded as part of an earthquake. The question is whether
such precursor really exists or not. So-called pre-slip envisaged in
586 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
the dynamic models of earthquake source is also a good theoretical
possibility but its observation appears difficult. Precise geodetic
measurement by GPS may succeed in the detection of the pre-slip. It
seems that electromagnetic phenomena prior to final rupture may be
According to new concepts earthquakes occur when the crust
reaches a critical state, emission of electromagnetic signals before
final rupture is theoretically plausible, notably in the ultra low frequency
(ULF) range and very low frequency (VLF) range.
It is hoped that well organized electromagnetic monitoring may
provide unique observational information on the pre-slips. Atmospheric/
ionospheric anomalies still remain unresolved. Post earthquake disaster
recovery, communication and damage assessment are also areas where
space science and communication technology can quickly make its
impact. I am sure radio scientists will definitely be keen to establish
the co-relation between the occurrence of earthquake and the
electromagnetic disturbances noticed in the specific region.
It is important to mention and acknowledge the contributions
made by the Amateur radio operators called HAMs, who started using
radio communication technique particularly the shortwave for long
distance communication through the ionosphere during the first decade
of 20th century. The experience of HAMs has been used for remote
area, disaster management and emergency communication world over
during the last hundred years. NASA, ISRO and other space agencies
have honoured the HAMs by launching exclusive satellite for them
so that they can continue to contribute in the latest trends of satellite
communication. During the recent Tsunami it was a coincidence that
a Government of India approved amateur radio expedition was in
Andaman and was operational during the disaster and provided vital
communications to the mainland and Indonesia for getting latest updates
on the movement of Tsunami waves and rescue operations. The
contributions made by Indian HAMs in this Tsunami have been
acknowledged at national and international level. Amateur radio and
remote area communication are synonymous with emergency
communication. It is advisable to promote this hobby to set up amateur
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 587
radio stations in Panchayat offices, schools and hospitals by voluntary
agencies who will be able to locate and operate the HAMs throughout
the day and night, on all days. Each Panchayat must encourage this
hobby and can make it as a part of the village knowledge centre.
This will act as an early warning system for the village community in
case of an unforeseen eventuality. At this hour, I would like to remember
fondly the significant contribution of the Late Dr. Shrikant Jichkar in
promoting HAMs in India.
Commercial radio communication system operates with high
power, frequency diversity with large antenna to improve the reliability
of communication. HAMs work with limited power under man-made
and natural radio interference and work in difficult circumstances.
There is a lot of scope to improve narrowband communication technique
in multi hop HF communication to remote areas such as Antarctica
and Arctic to improve the quality of HAM communication. The
members of the radio science community can definitely assist the
HAM operators through research in establishing low cost narrowband
India is in the mission of transforming into a developed country.
Many developed countries are racing towards Moon and Mars which
may lead to the next industrial revolution. We also have the opportunity
of joining this exclusive club of nations to establish industry in Moon
and Mars with our core competence in space science and technology.
The technological challenges are:
Manufacturing and Mining in reduced gravity.
Harnessing Helium-3 in Moon for future energy, using
Using dry ice deposits in Moon and Mars as source of fuel
Extending life of satellites in orbit through refuelling and
Using the Moon as space transportation hub.
Building human habitats on the Moon, Mars and also in
588 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Above all, it is essential to establish reliable space
communication systems that will work during all ionospheric
disturbances and sunspot activities.
Characteristics of moon have a vital implication for space science.
As civilization spreads to Mars in five to eight decades, the Moon
will provide the main link between earth and her scattered children.
The earth's ionosphere reflects all but the shortest radio waves back
to Earth. Earth's dynamic atmosphere prevents the use of lasers for
communication into space. On the near airless Moon, this would not
be a problem, for the Moon's sky is perennially clear to waves of all
Thus the Moon will soon become a "Telecommunications Hub"
for interplanetary communications, aiming its tightly focused laser
beams to other planets and ships in space. With interplanetary
communication systems located on the far side, the Moon would also
shield these communication stations from the continuous radio emissions
from the earth. The far side of the Moon would be the quietest place
within millions of kilometres from the earth, in the sense of radio
silence. The coming few decades will provide a great challenge to
Since a large number of radio science specialists have assembled
here I would like to make the following seven suggestions to this
scientific community which will be useful to the entire mankind.
(1) There has been a revolution in communication science and
technology all over the world. The result of this revolution
has to reach the common man. This can be in the form of
providing affordable high bandwidth tele-communication
to every villager, such as mobile phones with GPRS/CDMA,
satellite and FM radio and IP communication. Research is
required to bring down the cost and make this revolution
reach seamlessly to six billion people of the world.
(2) The power of radio communication needs to be utilized for
improving the educational standards of our rural masses.
Recently, I was addressing the students of three universities
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 589
in three different regions of the country from Rashtrapati
Bhavan. While organizing this event I found that the
connectivity to various comers in the country is yet to become
seamless. The radio and space communication specialists
have to work together to make high bandwidth seamless
connectivity for the tele-education programmes to reach our
distant villages with ease through broadband communication.
(3) There are possibilities of correlation between the seismic
activities and electromagnetic activity in the particular region.
There is a need to have a comprehensive study on the subject.
This study should also be linked with the study of other
geophysical parameters relevant to an earthquake. This will
be a great contribution of the radio science community to
mankind towards disaster mitigation.
(4) India is in the process of establishing three Science centres
in different parts of the country to create a scientific research
cadre. The URSI can evolve a possible curriculum for study
and research in the electromagnetic spectrum in these
(5) I understand that the adaptive radio and software radio are
among the thrust areas of wireless communication
technologies. In this connection, it is essential for the radio
scientists to provide a solution for getting high bandwidth
communication in the wireless spectrum in a mobile
environment for an optimal distance without the constraints
of line of sight.
(6) Radio scientists and technologists should continue to strive
for optimum and bandwidth efficient communication
techniques even when higher frequency bands like millimetre
waves, sub-millimetre waves and quasi optical waves have
started becoming available; there is not much congestion at
this stage in this frequency band, but the ever increasing
use of radio frequencies spectrum needs evolution of an
590 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
(7) Solar power satellites may become a reality in a few decades.
Because of its potential for transmitting large volume of
power in Gigawatts, the possible electric power transmission
is through microwave to the earth. Research is essential to
find out the relationship of transmitting frequency with
I find that radio science embraces all areas of human activity
such as provision of cost-effective communication to all the citizens,
education, health care, development, disaster mitigation, earthquake
forecasting and solution to energy problem. In overall perspective,
connectivity is the key for the growth of the humanity. Hence, radio
scientists have a major role to play with their continuing research in
promoting economic prosperity to the planet Earth through uninterrupted
connectivity. My best wishes to all the participants of the General
Assembly of International Union of Radio Science in their mission
of making electromagnetic spectrum a friend of humanity.
Global Human Development Cadre
J' AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of the Global
Conference on India R & D 2005 - The World's Knowledge Hub
of the Future. I greet the organizers, researchers, scientists, technologists,
education planners, industry captains and other distinguished participants
of the Conference. I am happy to know that the Conference aims at
projecting India as a cost-effective knowledge hub of the future and
at stimulating investment in terms of more R & D centres being set
up in the country. The resultant collaborative and cost-effective research
will lead to affordable and responsive technologies for the larger good
of the humankind. The topic of my discussion today is "Missions for
The important components needed for the evolution of knowledge
hub are: Attracting youth for science learning and career, focussed
national R&D programmes, urge for the industry to become
internationally competitive and the need for the electronic and
knowledge connectivity through four Grids.
Since my assuming office, I have visited all the States and many
Union Territories. During these visits amongst the many people I
meet, there will always be young students. I have so far met around
800,000 students, majority of them in the high school below 17 years
of age. I have also met the parents of the students. When I meet
students, I always ask them, whether they would like to take science
as a mission. In a gathering of 1000 students, drawn from geographically
distributed schools, I have never found more than 20 students
enthusiastically answering that their mission in life would be science.
Address during the Inauguration of the Global Conference on "India R&D
2005 : The World's Knowledge Hub of the Future", Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi,
592 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
For example, on 3rd October 2005, I was inaugurating the Virtual
University programme of the Universities of Kolkata, Chennai and
Mumbai through a tele-education delivery system from the multimedia
studio of Rashtrapati Bhavan. During my interaction with the students,
Ms. Arunava Roy, of 1st Year - Biotechnology from the University
of Kolkata asked me the following question:
"A majority of the bright students at the high school level aspire
to become a doctor or an engineer. How can these rich minds be
motivated towards taking up research as a first grade career option?"
This question is indeed the reflection of the feelings of most of
the students who are in the 10+2 stage. We have to find the right
answer. I have had many discussions with parents also. The parents
spend almost all their earnings in order to educate their children, since
they see the education as the best way of promising an assured career.
They even go to the extent of sacrificing their personal luxuries and
get loans to educate the children. The only vision they have in their
eyes is to see well-settled sons and daughters with guaranteed profession.
They see this happen if their children pursue a degree in Engineering,
Management, Medicine or administrative services. They do not see
the pursuit of pure sciences and research guaranteeing this.
This, I consider as an important area of concern of the nation
and it needs the attention of the scientific community as a whole. In
my view, we can initiate the following actions.
It is essential for the nation to assure a career for those who wish
to pursue science as a mission. This will attract many students with
the full support of the parents. We should work for the creation of a
science cadre, with well defined growth path and attractive salaries.
There should be a minimum annual intake of about 400 M.Sc. and
200 Ph.Ds with assured career growth in the organisations such as
ISRO, DRDO, Atomic Energy, CSIR, DST and the Universities.
Similarly, private sector industries in pharma, IT, oil and natural gas,
power, transportation, agriculture should be able to attract additional
four hundred M.Sc. and two hundred Ph.Ds every year for carrying
out research on frontier areas of science and technology.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 593
Now I would like to discuss some of the key areas of research
and development, which will have global implications and also meeting
The world market in 2004 for nano materials, nano tools, nano
devices and nano biotechnology put together is over hundred billion
dollars. It has been noticed that the fastest growing area among these
Carbon nano tubes and its composites will give rise to super
strong, smart and intelligent structures in the field of material science.
Nano-biomedical sensors will play a major role in glucose detection
and endoscopic implants. Drug delivery system will revolutionize
the health care to a large extent.
Molecular switches and circuits along with nano cell will pave
the way for the next generation computers. Ultra dense computer
memory coupled with excellent electrical performance will give the
society low power, low cost, nano size and yet faster assemblies.
The last four decades have also affected the packaging concept.
Electronics packaging of the past has given way to the present
microsystems packaging and the shift in the trend is now towards the
futuristic nano packaging. We have to choose our own area of research
and participate in the nano science technology revolution, which is
just round the corner.
Energy independence has to be our nation's first and highest
priority. We must be determined to achieve this within the next 25
years, i.e by the year 2030. This one major, 25-year national mission
must be formulated, funds guaranteed, and the leadership entrusted
without delay as public-private partnerships to our younger generation,
now in their 30's, as their lifetime mission in a renewed drive for
nation-building. One of the key areas of research is improving the
efficiency of solar photovoltaic energy system.
Presently, silicon photovoltaic cells work with an efficiency of
13% to 15%, whereas research has already shown promise of achieving
50% efficiency in solar photo voltaic cells with CNT and silicon bonding.
594 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
This is an important work, which will revolutionize the use of solar
energy for meeting the energy demands of many countries in the planet.
Presently, Rashtrapati Bhavan is working on a project for creation of
a five-megawatt solar energy power plant for meeting the energy needs
of the Rashtrapati Bhavan. The capital cost of this unit will work out
to approximately Rs. 100 crore. If the high efficiency photovoltaic
cell is available the cost of the plant will come down by 60% in addition
to substantial reduction in space utilization and the structure created
for the plant. Thus, this research is a vital area for getting cost and
space-effective solar power plants in India and in other countries.
Educational institutions, R & D organizations and the industry should
mount a mission mode programme to realize quantity production and
marketing of the high efficiency CNT based photovoltaic cell within
the next three years. In notional terms there will be a minimum
saving of two lakh crore rupees in capital cost for establishing 50,000
megawatts of solar power out of 100,000 megawatt of power from
renewable energy sources required for realizing energy independence
Nanotechnology for Cancer Treatment: Nanotechnology can find
application in spotting cancer earlier than it can be done now. It can
also enable highlighting tiny clusters of cancer cells and help the
doctors detect whether cancer has spread or shrunk in response to
treatment without the need for surgery. The third application could
be to send the drugs encased in packages small enough to slip through
cancer cell walls, kill tumour without damaging healthy cells thus
reducing the side effects of treatment. All these areas are promising
applications and there is a need for the oncologists, pharmacologists,
nano-science and technologists to work together and make such drug
and drug delivery system through nanotechnology a reality in a time
Nuclear power generation has been given a thrust by the use of
uranium-based fuel. However there would be a requirement for a
tenfold increase in nuclear power generation even to attain a reasonable
degree of energy self-sufficiency for our country. Therefore it is essential
to pursue the development of nuclear power using Thorium, reserves
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 595
of which are huge in the country. Research and technology development
has to be accelerated for Thorium-based reactors since the raw material,
Thorium, is abundantly available in our country. Also, nuclear fusion
research needs to be progressed with international co-operation to
keep that option for meeting the large power requirement, at a time
when fossil fuels get depleted. This research will be useful for many
countries in the world. From Indian point of view we will be able to
realize the goal of producing at least fifty thousand megawatt of power
Presently, the oil yield from the seeds of bio-fuel plants is just
around 30% of the seed weight. Intensive research is required to
increase the oil yield from the present 30% to at least 50%, which
will enable the reduction in basic cost of bio-fuel per litre from the
existing Rs. 20 to around Rs. 12. This reduction will also provide
adequate incentive to the farmer for cultivating bio-fuel plants in the
field for generating large revenue compared to what he is getting
now. This research will enable the country to save an additional Rs.
10,000 crore in foreign exchange, which is being now incurred for
importing fossil fuel. Intensive research is also required to burn bio
fuel in internal combustion engines with high efficiency. This also is
an urgent R&D programme.
It is reported that in India the number of HIV infected people is
on the increase. It is critical that the transmission of HIV infection is
prevented. An effective vaccine that can prevent this disease will be
a cost-effective tool for control of infectious diseases. There are three
sub-types of viruses classified as A, B and C. I understand that Indian
population is largely affected by sub-type C virus.
There are two candidate vaccines presently considered for use
against sub-type C virus in our country. In view of the urgency of
finding a cost-effective vaccine, the expert group reviewed the vaccine
candidate for HIV sub-type C in the pipeline. Adeno-Associated Virus
(AAV) based vaccine with HIV-1 sub-type C (African strain) developed
by Targetted Genetics Corp, USA was found to be in advanced stage
of test in different parts of the world. This HIV vaccine (tgAAC09) is
596 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
now undergoing Phase-I trial for safety and immunogenicity assessment
in healthy HIV uninfected volunteers at National AIDS Research
The Indian vaccine has been developed by scientists from
National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases in collaboration
with National Aids Research Institute, Pune and Therion Biologies,
USA. This is a recombinant vaccine containing six genes from HIV
1-C strain. This vaccine was developed from the virus isolated from
National Aids Research Institute, Pune. This will go into Phase-I trial
in healthy uninfected adults at Tuberculosis Research Centre, Chennai
during this year. Both these programmes are being progressed as a
joint venture between ICMR, National Aids Control Organisation
(NACO) and International Aids Vaccine Initiative. In addition to these
two vaccines a DNA based vaccine and SFV vaccine are also under
Time has now arrived to take up this development in a mission
mode so that an effective vaccine will be available for our country
within the next two years. Simultaneously, I would suggest that the
medical community must start working on the development of anti
vaccines for sub-types A and B also.
Aerospace Vision: With our national strength and opportunity
for larger demand in aerospace systems and export potential, a large
business for industries is in front of us. It is essential that this strength
be integrated into a National Aeronautics Policy for integrating the
strengths of both civil and military aviation sectors to bring synergy
in the aviation sector. Implementation of this policy will usher in an
era of high technology and high skill industry environment resulting
in generation of assets, wealth and employment opportunities in the
country. National Aeronautical Policy is being progressed now; I am
sure that it will lead to the formation of Aeronautical Commission.
Design, development and production of 200 seater aircraft and the
hypersonic reusable vehicle are the important missions in front of the
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 597
Passenger Jet Aircraft: A study undertaken by the committee of
experts on India's vision 2020 has come out with a large potential for
aircraft to be produced in India. The technology vision document
has concluded that it will be economically viable to produce a 150-
seater aircraft in India. What is needed is to integrate the strength
available in the country in a mission mode. With technology partnership
between aerospace industries and academic institutions the Indian
made passenger aircraft will become a reality.
The development of passenger aircraft calls for many complex
technologies to be mastered. For example, the improvement of fuel
efficiency using unducted fan is a great challenge. Identifying
international collaborators and partners for joint development of many
appropriate technologies at the initial phase itself would be required.
This will also increase the potential for marketing in the international
scene as well. This will be another area of research and development
urgently needed for giving a fillip to air transportation industry.
Hypersonic reusable launch vehicle is an emerging area to achieve
greater speeds using Ramjet and Scramjet engines. A study has been
presently carried out for an air launched reusable hypersonic vehicle
flying at an altitude of 30-40 km. in cruise mode at mach 7 to a range
of 2000 km and fly back to the launch point.
This type of missions will be highly useful for multiple applications.
In the case of Hyperplane, the aim was to achieve larger payload
fraction. The space shuttle of USA with 2000 tonnes take-off weight
could launch only 30 tonnes in low earth orbit, giving a payload fraction
of 1.5%. India's concept of Hyperplane aims to realise 15%ofpayload
fraction. This will considerably reduce the launch cost per mission
and will enable multiple missions such as transport, reconnaissance,
payload delivery, satellite injection etc. A typical mission of Hyperplane
takes off with 100 tonnes weight using fan ramjet engine, works on
scramjet mode for nearly 1000 sec. during which time it collects the
left over air, cools it and separates as liquid oxygen. This increases
its weight to 166 tonnes, thereafter it flies in rocket engine mode
598 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
using the liquid oxygen and stored liquid Hydrogen to deliver a payload
of 15-16 tonnes. This concept of mass addition in flight is unique
and conceived by Indian scientists. Hypersonic Technologies include
scramjet propulsion, air liquefaction, high temperature materials,
guidance control and software package. I visualize space transportation
to become a reality within the next two decades. Some countries
have already started booking places on the moon. It is essential to
visualize the future and embark on a collaborative programme for
making hypersonic reusable launch vehicle a reality.
For India to become a leader in the knowledge era, it is necessary
to have revenue per capita almost increased by an order of magnitude.
To achieve this our software industry has to move up the value chain
and come up with innovative products that will have an order of
magnitude commercial impact in the international market. I am confident
that the Indian IT Industry is capable of undertaking such mega missions.
Development of knowledge products should become the prime focus
of exclusive R & D Units created as joint venture projects. The aim
should be to capture at least 15% of the global business volume in
the ITES (IT enabled services) and BPO sectors around 200 billion
dollars out of 1.2 trillion dollars. Software products account for 260
billion dollars of global business. At least we should work for a market
share of 10% in the beginning. Hence the total market share for India
should be 200 plus the additional 26 billion dollars.
So far we have discussed some of the important R&D programmes
in various sectors of the knowledge society towards meeting the national
development requirements. Now I would like to talk about the
connectivity mission needed to bridge the components of the knowledge
society and enable the nation to develop and produce the products in
The electronic connectivity for one billion people must transform
into a network and provide a seamless access between knowledge
creator, converter of knowledgeable products and the knowledge
consumers. This can be achieved through the creation of knowledge
grid, health grid, governance grid and PURA grid.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 599
To maximize the synergy between the grids, leading to
maximization of GDP and productivity, there is a need for inter-grid
connectivities, which may be called as societal grid. Knowledge sharing,
knowledge utilization and knowledge re-use is very vital by all
constituents of the society for promoting non-linear growth. Societal
1. Knowledge Grid - Inter connecting universities with socio
economic institutions, industries and R&D organizations.
2. Health Care Grid - Inter-connecting the Health Care
institutions of Government, Corporate and Super specialty
hospitals. Research institutions, educational institutions and
ultimately, Pharma R&D institutions.
3. E-Governance Grid - Inter-connecting the Central
Government and State Governments and District and Block
level offices for G2G and G2C connectivity.
4. PURA Knowledge Grid - Connecting the PURA Nodal centre
with the Village knowledge centres and Domain service
providers. Since this is the backbone for rural development,
all other Grids will infuse the knowledge into this Grid for
sustainable development, health care and good governance.
For example, five of the Periyar PURA villages have now
connected using Wi-MAX connectivity.
Integrated village knowledge centres will act as an inter-connected
delivery mechanism for tele-education, tele-medicine and e-
Govemance services apart from individual access by the people, within
and between the Village Knowledge Centres through the PURA Grid.
Bandwidth as an infrastructure: In order to make the country the
most advanced knowledge society, we should aim at making the
bandwidth available without hindrance and at no cost. Making the
bandwidth available is like the Government laying the roads. Movement
of materials through these roads creates wealth in the industrial economy
and the government recovers more than the investment on the roads
600 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
by way of taxes and enhanced prosperity of its people. In the modern
digital economy driven by knowledge products, bits and bytes traverse
the network and create wealth and this will recover the cost of
investments in the bandwidth. Cost-effective creation of the four
Grids and inter connectivity between Grids is the profound platform
for collaborative research, development and deployment.
In the 21 st century, India needs a large number of talented youth
with higher education for the task of knowledge acquisition, knowledge
imparting, knowledge creation and knowledge sharing. At present
India has 540 million youth under the age of 25 which will continuously
be growing till the year 2050. Keeping this resource in mind, the
Universities and educational systems should create two cadres of
personnel: (1) a global cadre of skilled youth with specific knowledge
of special skills and (2) another global cadre of youth with higher
education. These two cadres will be required not only for powering
the manufacturing and services sector of India but also will be needed
for fulfilling the human resource requirements of various countries.
Thus, the universities will have to work towards increasing the through
put of the higher education system from the existing 6% to 20% by
the year 2015, 30% by the year 2020 and 50% by the year 2040. The
other Indians who are not covered by the higher education system
should all have world class skill sets in areas such as construction,
carpentry, electrical systems, repair of mechanical systems, fashion
design, para-legal, para-medical, accountancy, sales and marketing,
software and hardware maintenance and service, software quality
assurance personnel etc. No Indian youth should be without either a
world-class higher education or without world-class skill sets. This
is the mission, which must be undertaken by all our Universities and
the educational systems. We have to start right now to realize this
goal since the overall time available for such an educational growth
is short. A National Policy for creating a "Global Human Development
Cadre for India" has to emerge.
So far I have placed my thoughts before you. Finally, I would
suggest to the research and development community assembled here
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 601
to discuss the following questions during the deliberations in the
1. How do you relate solving the problems of the people of
the country to Research, Development and Production?
2. How do you contribute at the Global level in giving
competitive edge, wealth and prosperity?
3. What are the problems, suggestions and solutions: Water,
Energy, Health care, Education, Employment and Livelihood?
My best wishes to the members of the Global Conference
on India R & D 2005 - The World's Knowledge Hub of the Future
for success in their mission of making India a preferred destination
for carrying out research needed for societal transformation of the
Digital Library and its Multidimensions
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in the dedication of digital
mobile lab for preservation of heritage manuscripts organized by
Mahabharatha Samshodhana Pratisthanam. My greetings to the
organizers, all the team members in the digitization and the knowledge
business, library and information science professionals.
This digital mobile lab for manuscripts and heritage uses various
cutting edge technologies to give a complete end-to-end solution for
the holistic process of restoring manuscripts. It integrates the space
communications, digital imaging and chemical engineering technologies
to achieve the task of documentation, conservation, digitization and
dissemination of the manuscripts of our country, wherever they are.
Once a custodian institution/repository is identified it would record
global positioning data and creates the digital manuscript map of India.
The surveyed manuscripts are subject to chemical conservation to
defumigate the manuscripts. Subsequently, manuscripts are deciphered
and digitized using special scanning station called 'Vyasa'.
The mobile digital library can become a partner of the Digital
Library of India portal. Sharing of digital content with no barriers
will truly speak of the technology as an integrator of people. I would
like to talk to this audience on "Digital library and its Multi-dimensions".
Knowledge has always been the prime mover for prosperity. A
knowledge society is one of the basic foundations for the development
of any nation. Knowledge has many forms and it is available at many
places. The acquisition of knowledge has therefore been the thrust
area throughout the world and sharing the experience of knowledge
is a unique culture of our country. Digital Library is a new instrument
which can spread the knowledge nearly at the speed of light. India is
Address at the Dedication of State-of-the-Art Digital Mobile Laboratory for
Preservation of Heritage Manuscripts, Bangaluru, 21 November 2005
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 603
a nation endowed with natural and competitive advantages as also
certain distinctive competencies. But these are scattered in isolated
pockets and the awareness on these is inadequate. During the last
few centuries the world has undergone a change from agriculture society,
where natural labour was the critical factor, to industrial society where
the management of technology, capital and labour provided the
competitive advantage. In the 21st century, a new society is emerging
where knowledge is the primary production resource instead of capital
and labour. Efficient utilisation of existing knowledge can create
comprehensive wealth for the nation in the form of better health,
education, infrastructure etc. for improving the quality of life. Ability
to create and maintain the knowledge infrastructure, develop knowledge
workers and enhance their productivity through creation, growth and
use of new knowledge will be the key factors in deciding the prosperity
of this Knowledge Society. Whether a nation has emerged as a
knowledge society or not is judged by the way the country effectively
deals with knowledge creation and knowledge deployment.
The systematic process of finding, selecting, organizing, distilling
and presenting information, improves an employee's comprehension
in a specific area of interest. Knowledge management helps an
organization to gain insight and understanding from its own experience.
Specific knowledge management activities help focus the organization
on acquiring, storing and utilizing knowledge for problem solving,
dynamic learning, strategic planning and decision making. It also
prevents intellectual assets from decay, adds to firm intelligence and
Knowledge creation has two dimensions, one is explicit knowledge
and the other one is implicit knowledge. The explicit knowledge comes
from published books, written materials, proceedings, presentations
etc., whereas the implicit knowledge is derived through the systematic
observation and capturing of data from the tacit knowledge available
among the individuals in the organization, through their approach to
problem solving, bottle-neck removal, goals setting, interactions etc.
We need a systematic mechanism to capture this knowledge to make
the organization a truly learning organization which makes use of
existing knowledge judiciously and efficiently.
604 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Digital mobile library is an important component for capturing
the explicit knowledge. This has to be supplemented with the implicit
knowledge to the digital library system, which will eventually get
transformed into a knowledge management system. Let us study how
the digital mobile library influences knowledge management in India
through research, design and development. This may be relevant to
other countries also. I am happy that the Digital Mobile Lab has
used the current technology to preserve the manuscripts of rare Indian
heritage and also created a digital storage system through a special
scanner. Instead of the manuscript being moved to a central place
with the associated risk of the manuscript being damaged the mobile
lab will reach the place where the manuscript is stored and capture
the information in situ. This technique is definitely laudable and will
ensure that all the people holding the manuscript will co-operate because
they do not have to move to any place for offering the document.
There is a mission of Digital library web portal to create a portal
for digital library of India piloted by the Ministry of Information
Technology (MIT) with IISc and Carnegie Mellon University as partners
for fostering creativity and free access to all human knowledge. This
digital library as a first step will create a free-to-read searchable
collection of one million books by 2005 in India. This library was
launched in 2003. Prof. N. Balakrishnan, Chief Co-ordinator of Digital
Library of India informs me that so far 20 centres are operational
throughout the country, over 1,50,000 books have been digitized of
which nearly 50,000 are in 9 Indian languages. In the library of
Rashtrapati Bhavan, which is part of the Digital Library of India, we
have so far digitized over ten million pages and also we are digitizing
our old official records leading to e-governance implementation. The
data will be available for use by different institutions in the country
and abroad, depending upon their needs. The programme is progressing
in the right direction. I would suggest that Mahabharata Samshodhana
Pratisthanam can become a partner of the digital library programme
and disseminate the collected information by the digital mobile
laboratory among the various enlightened users of the country.
Digital libraries are not the digital equivalents of the present-
day library. They would include, besides the books, manuscripts and
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 605
journals, information and our heritage in all other forms including
speech, folk songs, paintings and carvings. It is important that we
take on this mission of integrating all forms of knowledge and culture
into our Digital Library.
India has rich information relating to literature, music, traditional
system of medicine and science embedded in palm leaves. It is necessary
to search, understand and preserve this valuable information. Merely
scanning the palm leaves would not be very useful. The number of
people who can read the palm leaves and interpret the meanings, identify
the plants and stones mentioned in the palm leaves is dwindling. Even
those few who can read, cannot write very well, that too may not be
fluent in entering into the computer in Digital Forms. The Optical
Character Recognition of these ancient scripts is also a very tough
problem, almost intractable technically. I suggest that for every palm
leaf scanned, we record in audio the information read by the experts.
We can then put these on the web and invite other experts to provide
free and fair commentary and validate every palm leaf data. This data
can also be used for creating a new generation of palm leaves reading
experts - a species that has almost vanished.
Digitisation of old manuscripts is a national mission. We should
see that all the schools, colleges, and universities digitize their libraries
in their own native languages and connect to the outside world within
the next four years. We have to ensure availability of fibre optic cables,
satellite communication and wireless infrastructure especially in remote
areas. It is also essential to realize high bandwidth technology like
Multiple 10 Giga Bits connectivity across the country. This will ensure
dissemination of information contained in the rare manuscripts to all
the remote areas of the country without any distortion.
I dedicate the Digital Mobile Lab for preservation of Heritage
manuscripts to the nation and wish the members of Mahabharatha
Samshodhana Pratisthanam success in their mission of using technology
for preserving and disseminating Indian cultural heritage to all the
citizens particularly the researchers.
Energy Conservation : Challenges
J AM HAPPY to participate in the Inauguration of the National
Energy Conservation Day. I greet the members of the Ministry of
Power, energy experts, academicians, industrialists, municipal
authorities, building experts, students and distinguished guests. My
greetings to all the award winners of the industry who have conserved
energy and actively contributed in this vital national development
task, since I consider that energy saved is equivalent to energy generated.
I extend my special greetings to the children who have participated
in the energy conservation painting competition and are creating a
youth movement in this energy conservation mission for bringing
out the energy conservation potential. I would like to discuss on the
topic "Energy Conservation: Challenges".
Of about 1,000 billion units of electrical energy produced annually,
I understand only 600 billion units reach the consumer, whereas the
reported energy shortage is around 100 billion units. It has also been
found that the saving potential for the whole country is over 200 billion
units. Also, the demand for power at the peak time is around 135,000
megawatts as against the available generating capacity of 123,000
megawatts. This is the result of transmission loss and unaccounted
loss. I am sure with appropriate management of power and adoption
of comprehensive energy conservation strategy; it is possible to meet
the total demand of electrical energy and the peak time power without
increasing any generating capacity. To keep pace with the higher
economic activities on the three sectors, gradually we have to increase
the power generation to 300,000 MW before 2020.
When I think of peak load management of power I am reminded
of 1980s when I was working as Director (DRDL). In 1983-84, there
Address at the Inauguration of the National Energy Conservation Day, New Delhi,
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 607
was severe shortage of power in Andhra Pradesh. The Defence labs
had a peak load constraint of 3 mega watt power, whereas the connected
power was over 10 mega watts. This situation led to inefficient working
of all the three labs located in the complex. To overcome the situation
the three Directors of the laboratories at Hyderabad devised an innovative
plan to stagger the working hours in such a way that one set of
laboratories used to work for a four day week (from Monday to
Thursday) of 10-1/2 hour duration per day. The other set worked on
a different four days (Thursday to Sunday) with one common working
day available among all labs to facilitate inter laboratory communication.
This system ensured conservation of energy and maintained efficiency
within the peak load constraint imposed by the state electricity board.
This is one way of practical energy conservation.
Similarly, I would suggest implementation of staggered working
hours for the whole country based on the determination of the existing
peak demand period in various parts of the country. This will definitely
be possible in a large country like ours. For example sun rises at
Agartala one hour before it rises in Mumbai. If we follow such a
staggered system of working hours in different parts of the country,
it will definitely be possible to remove the peak hour shortage of 10
to 12%. In addition, we can also think of staggered working hours
and working days in various industries within a metropolitan city for
enabling reduced congestion on the roads leading to smooth flow of
traffic on all the days. Ministry of Power may like to analyze the
problem and suggest a staggered working hour model for the whole
country for ensuring full availability of peak load demand of all
industries. Now I would like to discuss some measures which can be
taken for meeting the overall energy shortage of the nation.
As a part of national campaign on Energy Conservation 2005
the Ministry has organized a school level painting competition amongst
3.5 lakh students of fourth and fifth class belonging to over 17,500
schools spread in different parts of the country. I appreciate the action
taken by the Ministry of Power in inspiring the children. In addition
to this, I would suggest another scheme which can be introduced amongst
students for detecting and reporting areas through which energy can
608 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
In my many interactions with school children, parents, teachers
and educationists, I have been told that our existing educational process
tends to emphasize learning by memory rather than strengthening
creativity. The essence of Science & Technology on the other hand
is embedded in two of the most fundamental impulses - the desire to
discover and the desire to invent. It is vital that our education process
nurtures and nourishes these two impulses.
An attempt in this direction has been made in a pilot programme
called "Mapping the Neighbourhood" initiated by the Department of
Science and Technology. In Almora district in Uttaranchal children
from 20 schools have been motivated to use mapping techniques to
investigate and map basic socio-economic, environmental and ecological
issues being faced by the neighbourhood community. Armed with
the scientific and technological tools such as Global Positioning System
(GPS), Geographic Information System (GIS), Space Imagery
incorporated in the hand held computers; the children are creating
maps with the neighburhood details to improve their understanding
of the immediate environment. These maps will enable further the
technological community to find solutions for the regeneration of
fast disappearing natural sources of water, improving road connectivity,
finding better locations for electricity and water distribution points,
reducing traffic congestion and improved systems of garbage collection.
Another children programme can be launched through a creative
task. The children can be asked to map the energy consumption of
each of the household, industry, hospital and the hotels in a particular
area. They can also request their own parents and the other members
in the locality to save electricity in their buildings to the extent possible
by switching off the lights, fans, air-conditioners, and other electronic
gadgets when they are not needed continuously. This measure will
not only save electricity but also prevent accidents occurring due to
electrical short circuits. If this awareness for saving electricity comes
to our youth, I am sure we will easily be able to save more than 10%
of the energy consumption. This will also give our youth an opportunity
for participating in our national development mission about which
they have been constantly asking during my various interactions.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 609
One of our experts says that "For a normally constructed building,
the present energy consumption in India is 300 kwh per sq m annually
which can be brought down to 140 kwh per m sq annually by proper
designs/details/philosophy, whereas in Germany with its strict energy
codes it is reported that the consumption is only 50 kwh per sq m
annually. It is all the more important for India to achieve at least a
target of 100 kWh per sq m annually within the next 5 years. This
will need co-ordinated effort between architects, builders and the energy
engineers, a newly developed expertise.
The architects and building planners have to play a very important
role in the design of the building with these features. The seeds of
this perspective have to be sown in the schools of architecture and
town planning. Energy conservation should start right from the location
of the site, the direction of buildings, windows, doors, glare etc. -
the aim should be to use maximum advantage of the sun and wind,
while minimizing the wasteful heat load from the sun into the buildings
The construction sector plays a significant role in economic
development of the country. Activities in the construction sector are
complex, highly dispersed and resource demanding. The activities of
the sector result in the loss of important natural assets and impose
severe stress on the environment. Agricultural land is often lost through
urbanization and extraction of raw materials. The consumption of
fossil fuels contributes to increased air pollution and emissions of
greenhouse gases. Energy is required for manufacturing materials,
for transport and for construction of buildings. Apart from this initial
energy use, there is also need for energy for functioning of buildings.
In the developed countries there is a growing demand for an
environmental impact assessment of all building projects, which includes
considerations of embodied energy, i.e. the energy that is consumed
in extraction of raw materials and production of finished building
However, construction is crucial to the prosperity and civilization
of human beings. People require habitats, schools, work places, markets,
places for sports and cultural activities. Our task therefore is to have
610 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
more and better construction for our billion people, but minimize per
capita energy consumption in the whole chain by value addition in
construction and maintenance. There is a need to reduce the embodied
energy especially in respect of office buildings, hospitals and hotels
by at least 10% of the present embodied energy consumed which is
in the region of 5,000 kilo watt hour per square metre.
I am happy that a good beginning has been made due to the
enactment of the Energy Conservation Act 2001. Bureau of Energy
Efficiency has been formed which has initiated the task of developing
Energy Conservation Building Codes.
The energy conservation in the shop floor has to start right from
the operator. We have to clearly create awareness and a sense of
responsibility among all operators to conserve energy in their own
limited areas. One method of planned improvement can come by
having a constant review of the energy utilization and reasons for
variance. The variance analysis will lead to determination of the causes
of increase which in turn can be attended to by the maintenance
personnel. Also, there is a need to instal energy conservation control
system which will be initiated whenever the machinery is idle and is
not required to be kept on.
In continuous operation chemical plants, switching off and on
may lead to inefficient process leading to enhanced energy utilization.
Wherever continuous reliable energy is not available, it will be
economical to use back-up system to ensure process efficiency and
prevent infructuous energy expenditure due to unplanned start - stop
operation. The companies may institute appropriate incentives for
encouraging the employees to conserve energy in their own domain
activity since this will have a direct bearing on the profitability of the
Energy is a vital input for industry. Enterprise-wise energy
conservation is an important wealth generator for every industry. For
ensuring competitiveness per capita energy utilization is an important
index. Keeping this in mind, I would request the experts assembled
here to address the following issues relating to practical energy
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 611
(a) Evolving energy utilization norms for different industries
such as cement, aluminum, steel, urea, textile etc. on per
capita basis and provide a challenge to designers to work
(b) Creating an enterprise-wise review mechanism to reveal the
variance from planned utilization to the actual. As far as
possible try to allocate the responsibility for this variance
and take immediate corrective action.
(c) Creating an idea bank in which employees can provide
innovative solutions for energy efficient operations. There
must be a system of analysis of ideas for implementing
practical ideas on the shop floor and suitable rewards.
(d) It is essential to instal progressively, the energy efficient
nano lamps, energy efficient heating and AC system in the
enterprise. For example, nearly 75 million households in
the rural sector today do not have electrical connection. It
would be a great saver of electricity if we can instal nano
crystal based LED lamps in all these rural houses.
(e) A mission mode programme can be created for energy
conservation. We have to set a target of saving 25 billion
units per year from the present 3.2 billion units, so that we
can wipe out the existing shortage within the next four years.
(f) Preparation and circulation of a small booklet enumerating
the simple to follow good practices for energy conservation
by offices, residential complexes, industries and agricultural
(g) In house R&D establishment should constantly work towards
energy efficient processes for adoption in both residential
I once again congratulate all the award winners and my best wishes
to the Ministry of Power and its partners for success in their mission
of providing uninterrupted hassle free power to all the citizens and
the industry with zero system wastage.

Media to know the Aspirations of the
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the Award Ceremony for
Recognizing Excellence in Journalism 2004 organized by the
International Press Institute (IPI), India Chapter. My congratulations
to award winner the NDTV and greetings to noted editors, publishers,
academicians, columnists, writers, media specialists and distinguished
guests. I would like to share with you my thoughts on the topic "Can
media be the partner in National Development". Media has to know
the dreams and aspirations of our people, particularly the youth of
Developed India is a nation where the rural and urban divide has
been reduced to a thin line. A nation where there is an equitable
distribution of energy and quality water. A nation where agriculture,
industry and service sector work together in symphony, absorbing
technology thereby resulting in sustained wealth generation leading
to higher employment potential. A nation where education is not denied
to any meritorious candidates because of societal or economic condition.
A nation which is the best destination for the most talented scholars
and scientists from all over the world. A nation where the best of
health care is available to all the billion population and the communicable
diseases like AIDS/TB, water and vector borne diseases, cardiac diseases
and cancer are extinct. A nation where the governance uses the best
of the technologies to be responsive, transparent, easily accessible
and simple in rules, thereby corruption free. A nation where poverty
has been totally eliminated, where illiteracy and crime against women
are eradicated and where the society is unalienated. A nation that is
prosperous, healthy, secure, peaceful and happy. A nation that is one
of the best places to live in on the earth and brings smiles on a billion
Address at the IPI-India Award for Excellence in Journalism 2004, New Delhi,
616 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
In the Indian history, very rarely we have come across a situation,
all at a time, an ascending economic trajectory, continuously rising
foreign exchange reserve, global recognition of technological
competence, energy of 540 million youth, umbilical connectivities
of 20 million people of Indian origin in various parts of the planet,
and the interest shown by many developed countries to invest in our
engineers and scientists including setting up of new R&D centres.
The priorities of the Government emphasize on economic development
by ensuring growth rate of 7% to 8% annually, enhancing the welfare
of the farmers and workers and unleashing the creativity of the
entrepreneurs, business persons, scientists, engineers and other
productive forces of the society. Also a dynamic technology powered
dynamic media is in place.
This is the time the nation has to focus all its technological and
financial growth towards the Vision, Vision of transforming India
into a developed nation before 2020. Media can definitely become a
great partner for promoting this Vision, as it played its role during
the independence movement 1857-1947.
Hence, I thought of highlighting two vision components - one is
India 2020 Mission and the other is PUR A (Providing Urban Amenities
in Rural Area) programme.
Our nation is going through a major challenge of uplifting of
260 million people who are below the poverty line and also to give
better life for many millions who are on the border line of poverty or
just above the poverty line. They need decent habitat, they need work
with reasonable income, they need food, they need health care, and
they need education and finally resulting in a good life. Our GDP is
growing at more than 6% per annum on an average, whereas the
economists suggest that to uplift the people from below the poverty
line, our economy has to grow at the rate of 10% per annum consistently,
for over a decade.
Integrated action: To meet the need of one billion people, we
have the mission of transforming India into a developed nation. We
have identified five areas where India has a core competence for
integrated action: (1) Agriculture and food processing, (2) Reliable
ana Quality Electric power, Surface transport and Infrastructure for
all parts of the country, (3) Education and Health care, (4) Information
and Communication Technology, and (5) Strategic sectors. These five
areas are closely inter-related and if well done would lead to food,
economic and national security. Another important mission linked to
national development is PURA.
Nearly 700 million people of India live in the rural areas in 600,000
villages. Connectivity of village complexes providing economic
opportunities to ail segments of people is an urgent need to bridge
the rural-urban divide, generate employment and enhance rural
prosperity. The essential needs of the villages today are water, power,
road, sanitation, and health care, education and employment generation.
Essential Connectivities through PURA: The integrated methods,
which will bring prosperity to rural India are: the physical connectivity
of the village clusters through quality roads and transport; electronic
connectivity through tele-communication with high bandwidth fibre
optic cables reaching the rural areas from urban cities and through
internet kiosks; knowledge connectivity through education, vocational
training for farmers, artisans and craftsmen and entrepreneurship
programmes; these three connectivities will lead to economic
connectivity through starting of enterprises with the help of banks,
micro credits and marketing the products.
As you may be knowing a number of development ventures are
taking place in different parts of the country. Some of them are Periyar
PURA in Thanjavur district of Tamil Nadu, BAIF - (Bharatiya Agro
Industries Foundation) in Gujarat, Project Siruthuli in Coimbatore,
Seed Cotton Productivity in the Village Nava Pind of Punjab, Synergy
Mission for Environmental Upgradation in Punjab and the Electricity
Generation through Municipal Waste in Hyderabad and Vijayawada
of Andhra Pradesh. I will discuss the details of these projects and the
results achieved so far, since the media need to know the silent changes
that are taking place.
Recently I had visited Periyar Maniammai college of technology
for women and inaugurated a PURA Complex. I thought of sharing
618 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
with you the developmental concept of a cluster of over 60 villages
near Vallam, Thanjavur district of Tamil Nadu which involves a
population of 3 lakhs. This PURA complex has all the three
connectivities - physical, electronic and knowledge - leading to
economic connectivity. The centre of activity emanates from the women
engineering college that provides the electronic and knowledge
connectivity. Periyar PURA has health care centres, primary to post
graduate level education and vocational training centres. This has
resulted in large scale employment generation and creation of a number
of entrepreneurs with the active support of 850 self-help groups. Two
hundred acres of waste land has been developed into a cultivable
land with innovative water management schemes such as contour ponds
and water sheds for storing and irrigating the fields. All the villagers
are busy in either cultivation, planting Jatropha, herbal and medicinal
plants, power generation using bio-mass, food processing and above
all running marketing centres. This model has emanated independent
of any government initiative. The committed leadership has been
provided by the Engineering institution. This gives me the confidence
that PURA is a realizable proposition and this movement can be
multiplied by thousands by entrepreneurs, educational administrators
and philanthropic institutions with the support of the government
Similarly, I have visited other tribal villages in south Gujarat
and there another model of PURA has succeeded through the BAIF
and Gujarat Government combination.
Food security and self-employment with good income is crucial
in tribal and semi-arid regions. I would like to share with you an
integrated village cluster development model. In these regions every
summer the tribal people migrate to nearby towns. BAIF - (Bharatiya
Agro Industries Foundation) has introduced a model in two villages
with peoples' co-operation and the participation of state authorities.
Firstly water harvesting was undertaken to get water for every individual.
Every home was provided with livestock and also a market for milk.
Simultaneously, fruit orchards were established with various fruit crops
such as cashew and mangoes, which are tolerant to drought. When 1
visited these villages, there was a connecting road and water ponds.
The tribal population, with radiant smiles on their faces, was harvesting
crops, packaging and carrying milk to different supply points. I happened
to see the economic growth and prosperity of the tribal people, which
has been facilitated by BAIF with people's participation. I understand
that this model Vadi (Orchard) has now been replicated in many places
by the state governments in the Deccan and desert regions. If such
actions are multiplied in a reasonably synchronized manner, then locally
generated wealth will increase and create new economic opportunities,
thus creating greater income and prosperity levels. Now I would like
to discuss about the project Siruthuli aimed at large scale rainwater
harvesting, afforestation, sewage/waste water treatment and solid waste
This is an initiative started by Coimbatoreans for Coimbatoreans.
This ecological project aims to bring back the glory of Coimbatore
and its rich heritage. The project is represented by people from all
walks of life and professionally organized. The primary focus is on
large scale rain water harvesting, afforestation, sewage/waste water
treatment and solid waste management. They have already standardized
five of the nine primary tanks in Coimbatore for large scale rainwater
harvesting. Over 600 saplings have been planted on the bunds of the
desilted tanks and are being maintained. They are moving towards a
target of planting 15 lakh trees by the end of 2005. The comprehensive
study has indicated outlet of the city sewage as 10 million litres per
day. A pilot plant is being taken up for sewage treatment to treat one
million litres per day. The treated water will be sold to the agriculturists
and industrialists as a revenue earning measure. The garbage and debris
to the extent of over 26,000 cubic metres in one of the city's largest
tanks have been removed. These are the major achievements for
developing a growing city. The next project I would like to talk to
you is on improving the productivity of wheat and cotton through a
co-operative movement in Bihar and Punjab where farmers, agricultural
scientists and industrialists are partners.
Wheat Productivity: There have been successful experiments
carried out by TIFAC team in Bihar, where per hectare output of
wheat has been tripled by farmers in collaboration with agricultural
scientists through scientific methods. As a result, the earnings of the
620 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
participating farmers have remarkably improved. Such experiments
can be replicated in many parts of our country, careful ly tailored to
local conditions. This is a crucial socio-economic need.
Seed Cotton productivity: Textile industry is very important for
the Indian economy. The basic raw material is cotton. India is the
third largest producer of cotton in the world. However, compared to
the world average of 700 kgs of seed cotton per acre we produce only
350 kgs of seed cotton per acre. It is indeed a technological concern
for the nation. Shri Oswal of Vardhman group adopted the village
Nava Find in the northern region, brought out a co-operative movement
of the farmers, scientists, trainers and the industry and launched
cultivating cotton in over 1200 acres. A training programme was
launched for farmers starting with soil characterization, matching the
cottonseed to soil, water and fertilizer management. They were also
trained on proper application of fertilizer and pesticide during the
seeding and growth process in the right season and proper irrigation
techniques to enhance the productivity of cotton.
The project resulted in increasing the average seed cotton yield
of the village from 450 kg per acre during the year 2002-2003 to
950 kg per acre for the year 2003-2004, that too with a considerably
reduced investment. This led to the increase in net return per acre in
the village from Rs. 2400 per acre to Rs. 17,000 per acre (a seven
times increase in return). This model can be replicated in many cotton
growing regions in the country and India can definitely produce 25%
of the total world production compared to the existing 12%. This
single village model has already been replicated in ten villages with
very good results towards improving the productivity of cotton uniformly
in all the villages. If this model is implemented in the entire cotton
belt, it has the potential to generate wealth of over Rs. 25,000 crores
a year for the nation and also generate employment opportunities for
millions of youths. In the next example I am narrating the experience
of a societal mission of improving the environment through the cleaning
up of Kali Bein rivulet in Punjab.
The status of environmental cleanliness is one of the indicators
of development of a nation. As a nation, we have to keep our environment
clean and tidy including ail our places of worship and rivers. I am
delighted to learn the Kali Bein rivulet, the place where Gurunanak
Dev is said to have received enlightenment and which had over the
centuries turned literally into a sewage-ridden, weed choked drain, is
today flowing clean and proud due mainly to the efforts of Baba Balbir
Singh Seechewal in partnership with the Punjab State Government.
From the discussions I understand that he organized people's
participation in stopping the massive flow of sewage into the Bein
and cleaned the 160 km long polluted and choked rivulet within the
last three and a half years by deploying on an average 3000 volunteer
workers per day. Today one can feel the flow of fresh water in this
rivulet released from the Tarkina Barrage by the government about a
year ago. The revival of the rivulet has recharged the water table as
the hand pumps that had became dry for the past four decades are
now pumping out water. Baba not only did the cleaning up operation
by clearing Bein from the weeds and hyacinth, but also built bathing
ghats at five places. He also built more than 100 km long kutcha road
on the banks of the rivulet.
While I was thinking how we should solve the problem of
improving the environment of rivers and religious places, I find one
of our enlightened citizens has taken the initiative and demonstrated
the power of ignited individuals to solve the societal problem. Let
this model spread in all the places of divine worship and inspire the
pilgrims to participate in the divine task of clean environment in water
and air. "Thousands of such local initiatives are needed for making
our country green." Finally I would like to talk about producing
electricity through municipal waste which has threefold advantages.
The scheme improves the environment, releases hectares of land
occupied in dumping municipal waste and augments electric power
Increased urbanization has led to a serious problem of accumulation
of municipal solid waste. Efficient and environmentally clean disposal
of garbage has always been a major technological challenge. While
being a threat to the environment, mounting garbage is also a rich
source of energy. The potential for converting this waste into useable
energy, which will eliminate a major source of urban pollution, was
622 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
realized by one of our innovative organizations, Technology Information
Forecasting and Assessment Council of DST which helped in developing
a completely indigenous solution for the processing of waste into a
source of fuel. This fuel could, in turn, be used for generation of
electricity through mini plants. Two entrepreneurs in Andhra Pradesh
adopted the technology with refinement and established two independent
plants in Hyderabad and Vijayawada generating over 12 megawatts
of electricity which is being supplied to the State grid. India needs
thousands of mini power plants using municipal waste. Industrial sector
can provide the thrust for promoting creation of such power plants in
major municipalities as a first step in collaboration with banks and
These are some of the examples of rural development projects
which can be promoted by the industry with the active participation
of banks for upliftment of the 700 million people living in our villages.
There are similar possibilities in water, habitat, infrastructure, ICT,
agriculture and many more. Once the industries get committed in all
these sectors in a proactive manner, I am sure the path to development
will be much smoother and our realization of development will be
I have some interesting responses to my reaching out to the people
through the media. I would like to share a few of them with you all
here today. The oath administered to the children on 2004 Republic
Day eve broadcast has resulted in motivating the Kutch Ecology
Foundation, who have made the entire Kutch district green within
the last 10 months. I hear similar efforts taking place in southern part
of India as well.
Two students of Velammal Engineering College, Lakshmanan
and Gayathri, have written to me how they succeeded in developing
a new paradigm of CD reading using nano antennas instead of
conventional laser reading systems after hearing my talk on nano
sciences and technology. They have presented their paper in IEEE
Likewise my talk on stem cell for treating visual defects resulted
in a lot of queries from various quarters which I directed to Dr.Taraprasad
Das of L.V. Prasad Eye Institute for advice and treatment. This is the
power of the media and it demonstrates how it can bring about positive
change for betterment of society.
Our media is one of the oldest, unconstrained and possibly the
most responsible in playing an active role in being the conscience
keepers of the nation. The heritage and the history of News Media
has many lessons not only for the students and practitioners of
Journalism but also for every one of us. Somehow, the preservation
of our past newspapers and their archiving have not been in tune with
technological advances - particularly those in scanning, OCR, storage
and retrieval. The Digital Library across the country and elsewhere
in the world had been focusing on digital preservation of our cultural
heritage, manuscripts and books. Time has come for the journalists
and media barons to create a Digital Library that has all the news
papers, magazines and radio and TV programmes ever produced by
this country in all languages since the beginning. Today this is possible
and affordable and India can show the way to the rest of the world by
making an inter-operable open archive. The next generation would
be ever grateful to you and will remember you, if you do this.
Now we are in the mission of transforming India into a developed
country by the year 2020. This mission needs the participation and
contribution from every citizen.
The vehicle for carrying forward this mission should be the Indian
media in all its forms, viz. print, radio, television and internet in multiple
languages. We all know that the media is today concentrating on 300
million people who are living in the urban areas. But I visualize that
media should become media for one billion people. It must reflect
the thoughts and aspirations, trials and tribulations, problems and
solutions of the 70% of population who are living in the villages. My
suggestion for the media would be that they should capture the
development activities taking place in different parts of the country
especially in the rural areas and disseminate through various channels
which will enable the common man to appreciate and understand the
benefits of certain projects for the region. Media has to spread
achievements of good and successful individuals and teams. I would
suggest that articles on scientific achievements written by reputed
624 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
science writers be published in two pages at least once in a week. If it
is continuously done they will be able to emulate and apply the
techniques in their region. I am looking for such intense partnership
from the media in this mission.
^he young journalists should be the visionaries for inspiring our
people to contribute towards national development. The media space
and time must be fully utilized to bring out the best to the viewers
and readers which can enable them to take the ight decision in selecting
the development route pertaining to their area and region.
In the present development context of the nation I would like
the media to take up the following missions for immediate
1. A Media movement: Developed India by 2020.
2. Media becoming a development partner in the programme
of PUR A (Providing Urban amenities in Rural Area) -
connectivity is the focus.
3. Celebrating every aspect of the success of the nation, from
any part of the country.
4. Evolution of corruption-free India before 2010. Particularly,
I have started a movement of administering an Oath among
the youth which states, "I will lead an honest life free from
all corruption and will set an example for others to adopt a
transparent way of life."
5. Promoting an enlightened society, which means education
with value system, transforming religion into a spiritual force
and building economic prosperity of every nation based on
its core competence. For this mission, a unique world body
6. Media should bring honour to the womanhood.
7. Scanning and digitizing all old issues of the print media
since its establishment and store in a digital library to preserve
our national heritage and make it available for research.
A nation without a vision is just like a ship in the ocean without
an engine for powering and sails (rudder) for direction. Fortunately,
India's youth power is the engine that gives the thrust to the movement
towards growth. The media can certainly give a positive direction for
development by becoming the multiple sails of the ship.
The International Press Institute with its media members may
motivate every newspaper and electronic channel in our vast country
to transform our nation into the profile of Developed India as discussed.
This is the mission which has to be done unitedly by the entire media
organisation. They have to use the special communication skill unique
to each region and language. My congratulations to NDTV for receiving
the IPI-India Award for Excellence in Journalism and my best wishes
to all the participants for successful partnership in the developed India
J AM INDEED delighted to participate in this National Film Awards
function. I congratulate particularly all the award winners, artists,
technicians and all those associated with films, for their excellent
performance in various facets of entertainment industry. I particularly
congratulate Shri Mrinal Sen for winning the coveted Dada Saheb
Phalke Award for the year 2004.
When I see you all, the galaxies in every field of cinema and
theatre, if you don't mind, I would like to give a challenging mission.
What is that mission? The mission I have for you is, through your
cinema, through your songs, through your actions, can you make the
nation to win? The nation has got everything, but we need leaders
with nobility, can you present the success stories of young men and
young women in the political field winning in your story, in your
song and in your action to make the nation great? You may say that
you find it difficult in reality, but it is not true. Mahatma Gandhi was
there, Jawaharlal Nehru was there, Vallabbhai Patel was there,
Gopalakrishna Gokhale was there, Abul Kalam Azad was there, like
this a number of leaders were there. If you can portray ten episodes
of present-day young men or women winning and succeeding in politics
with nobility, you have done your mission.
In this connection, now I would like to recite a poem which I
composed some time back. It is titled "Rock Walls".
Some build rock walls all their lives,
When they die miles of walls divide them.
Others build rock walls, one rock on another,
And: then build a terrace, where they pray for love.
Address at the National Film Awards Function, Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi,
Yet others build walls to enclose orchards,
Endeavouring to find ways to fulfil hunger.
A few others build rock walls - to make a home,
It is their mission to serve humanity and nature.
1 build no walls, to confirm to joy or sorrow;
To sacrifice or achieve, or to gain or lose,
I just grow flowers on all open spaces,
And float lilies on ponds and rivers.
I keep planting trees, for birds to have nests,
At the dawn of the sun, when morning breeze blow.
Sunlight gets filtered through shining tree leaves,
Birds' flight gives me sense of freedom and pleasure.
Scattered light of colour and treasure,
Fragrance of flowers gives me delight of creator.
Lilies floating over like nature's dance,
Why should I build walls to confine them all?
I have no house, only open spaces,
Filled with truth, kindness and dreams.
Desire to see my country developed and great,
Dreams to see everywhere happiness and peace.
Will you all work for converting this desire and dream into action?
My best wishes to all of you for success in this challenging mission.
Press - a Partner in National Development
I AM DELIGHTED to participate in the concluding function of the
Diamond Jubilee Celebrations of Press Club, Kolkata. Kolkata
has the distinction of being home to the first modern press in India
and the first press club in the subcontinent. Raja Ram Mohan Roy
brilliantly propagated the importance of the freedom of the press as
early as in 1823. Kolkata Press Club has a rich history and tradition.
Contribution of the Kolkata Press Club during the freedom movement
is noteworthy. I extend my greetings to all the members of the Press
Club of Kolkata during this Diamond Jubilee Celebrations. On this
occasion I would like to discuss with you the topic "Press - a partner
In the Indian history West Bengal has played a very important
role particularly in the freedom movement. The freedom movement
is a multi-dimensional activity emanating from the power of the leader
through his/her writings, speeches, some time in the form of freedom
songs and essays, and analyses. The poets composed patriotic songs
and the media particularly the print media gave the momentum to the
growth of the freedom movement in spite of the restrictions placed
by the rulers. Mahatma Gandhi, Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose, Sri
Aurobindo, and many others led the freedom movement. Similarly,
in the pre-independent era, eminent scientists and Nobel Laureates
have made many important contributions to the science, medical field,
literature, poetry and social reforms. The great names which come to
my mind are S.N. Bose, J.C. Bose, RabindraNath Tagore, Mahalanobis,
Meghnad Saha, Sir C.V. Raman, Dr. B.C. Roy and Mother Teresa.
West Bengal is also famous for many industries. In such an environment
of the past, which is continuing in the present and also will continue
in the future, Press Club of Kolkata will indeed have a tremendous
Address at the Concluding Ceremony of Diamond Jubilee Celebrations of Press
Club, Kolkata, 13 July 2005
opportunity for presentation of news, analyses and highlights. In
future publication of researched editorial, researched news analysis
and researched events should become the central theme of the media.
In the Indian history, very rarely we have come across a situation,
all at a time, an ascending economic trajectory, continuously rising
foreign exchange reserve, continuously reducing rate of inflation, global
recognition of technological competence, energy of 540 milli on youth,
umbilical connectivities of 20 million people of Indian origin in various
parts of the planet, and the interest shown by many developed countries
to invest in our engineers and scientists including setting up of new
R&D centres. As per the report titled "From the Ganges to the Thames''
which states that the Indian Foreign Direct Investment in Britain is
second only to that of the US, Indian FDI projects in Europe have
increased from just five to 119 during the period 1997 to 2004. The
Government is also committed to economic development by ensuring
a growth rate of 7% to 8% annually, enhancing the welfare of the
fanners and workers and unleashing the creativity of the entrepreneurs,
business persons, scientists, engineers and others - productive forces
of the society. Our nation has built a reputation for its democracy and
for providing leadership for the one billion people with multi-culture,
multi-language and multi-religion. And also our technological
competence and value system with civilizational heritage has been
highly respected. Can we expect anything better than this for increasing
the momentum of our development missions? Let us translate this
great opportunity for transforming our states into developed states
to realize our cherished dream of Developed India before 2020.
With 700 million people living in 600,000 villages the events
and news have to be unique and large when compared to other countries.
Lienee our print media has got a great challenge. Our news reporting
is mainly urban based in many of our States. This situation needs
change. I consider the newspapers or media are indeed a partner in
our national development. A partner means "somewhere an innovative
use of organic cultivation is taking place and the productivity of wheat
or rice is increased by two times", this indeed is a very important
news. This news must be studied, analyzed and propagated to many
630 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
places in the country. Similarly, a water pond had remained unused
for years and the farmers have collectively worked together and made
it operational, this indeed is a big news and must be reported. Such
reporting will enable desilting and rejuvenation of lakhs of water bodies
which are non-operational today in many of the States. Similarly, a
constructive criticism of how the Panchayat is working, how the flow
of funds from the Government is reaching the required development
project must also be reported so that necessary corrective measures
can emanate. Now I would like to discuss some of the innovative
development programmes that need media attention, which I have
come across in different parts of the country.
This is an initiative started by Coimbatoreans for Coimbatoreans.
This ecological project aims to bring back the glory of Coimbatore
and its rich heritage. The project is represented by people from all
walks of life and is professionally organized. The primary focus is
on large scale rainwater harvesting, afforestation, sewage/waste water
treatment and solid waste management. They have already standardized
five of the nine primary tanks in Coimbatore for large scale rainwater
harvesting. Over 600 saplings have been planted on the bunds of the
desilted tanks and are being maintained. They are moving towards a
target of planting 15 lakh trees by the end of 2005. The comprehensive
study has indicated outlet of the city sewage as 10 million litres per
day. A pilot plant is being taken up for sewage treatment to treat one
million litres per day. The treated water will be sold to the agriculturists
and industrialists as a revenue earning measure. The garbage and debris
to the extent of over 26,000 cubic metres in one of the city's largest
tanks have been removed.
The status of environmental cleanliness is one of the indicators
of development of a nation. As a nation, we have to keep our environment
clean and tidy including all our places of worship and rivers. I am
delighted to leam about the Kali Bein rivulet, the place where Gurunanak
Devji is said to have received enlightenment. Over the years this rivulet
has turned into a weed choked drain. Recently the river is clean due
to the efforts of Baba Balbir Singh Seechewal in partnership with the
Punjab State Government. From the discussions, I understand that
he organized people's participation in stopping the massive flow of
sewage into the Bein and cleaned 160 km long polluted and choked
rivulet within the last five years by deploying on an average 3000
volunteer pilgrims per day. Today one can feel the flow of fresh water
in this rivulet released from the Tarkina Barrage by the government
about two years ago. The revival of the rivulet has recharged the
water table as the hand pumps that had become dry for the past four
decades are now pumping out water. These are the major achievements
of voluntary organisations required to be celebrated by the Press. This
resulted in generation of an Oath to be taken by pilgrims visiting the
During the last two years I happened to see the products and
processes innovated by grass-roots innovators while giving away the
awards on behalf of National Innovation Foundation. There are many
creative products made by the rural artisans and farmers which have
enormous amount of societal value. Some of the award winning items
have been highlighted in certain magazines recently. Media should
work towards stories that generate confidence about the creative potential
at the grass roots. I would suggest that such reporting must become a
common practice by the media in multiple languages. This will not
only motivate the innovators but also enable many progressive farmers
to make use of the products and processes in real life leading to improved
productivity and wealth generation.
Recently I had visited Periyar Maniammai College of Technology
for Women and inaugurated a PURA Complex. I thought of sharing
with you the developmental concept of a cluster of over 60 villages
near Vallam, Thanjavur district of Tamil Nadu which involves a
population of three lakhs. This PURA complex has all the three
connectivities - physical, electronic and knowledge - leading to
economic connectivity. The centre of activity emanates from the women
engineering college that provides the electronic and knowledge
connectivity. Periyar PURA has health care centres, primary to post
graduate level education and vocational training centres. This has
resulted in large scale employment generation and creation of a number
of entrepreneurs with the active support of 850 self-help groups. 200
acres of waste land has been developed into a cultivable land with
innovative water management schemes such: as contour ponds and
632 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
water sheds for storing and irrigating the fields. All the villagers are
busy in either cultivation, planting Jatropha, herbal and medicinal
plants, power generation using bio-mass, food processing and above
all running marketing centres. This model has emanated independent
of any government initiative. The committed leadership has been
provided by the Engineering institution. This gives me the confidence
that PURA is a realizable proposition and this movement can be
multiplied by thousands by entrepreneurs, educational administrators
and philanthropic institutions with the support of the government
agencies. Press can definitely celebrate such schemes which enable
many entrepreneurs to join the movement.
There have been successful experiments carried out by TIFAC
team in Bihar, where per hectare output of wheat has been tripled by
farmers in collaboration with agricultural scientists through scientific
methods. As a result, the earnings of the participating farmers have
remarkably improved. Such experiments can be replicated in many
parts of our country, carefully tailored to local conditions. This is a
Textile industry is very important for the Indian economy. The
basic raw material is cotton. India is the third largest producer of
cotton in the world. However, compared to the world average of 700
kgs of seed cotton per acre we produce only 350 kgs of seed cotton
per acre. It is indeed a technological concern for the nation. Shri Oswal
of Vardhman group, adopted the village Nava Pind in the northern
region, brought out a co-operative movement of the farmers, scientists,
trainers and the industry and launched cultivating cotton in over 1200
acres. A training programme was launched for farmers starting with
soil characterization, matching the cottonseed to soil, water and fertilizer
management. They were also trained on proper application of fertilizer
and pesticide during the seeding and growth process in the right season
and proper irrigation techniques to enhance the productivity of cotton.
The project resulted in increasing the average seed cotton yield
of the village from 450 kg per acre during the year 2002-2003 to 950
kg per acre for the year 2003-2004, that too with a considerably reduced
investment. This led to the increase in net return per acre in the village
from Rs. 2400 per acre to Rs. 17,000 per acre (a seven times increase
in return). This model can be replicated in many cotton growing regions
in the country and India can definitely produce 25% of the total world
production compared to the existing 12%. This single village model
has already been replicated in ten villages with very good results towards
improving the productivity of cotton uniformly in all the villages. If
this model is implemented in the entire cotton belt, it has the potential
to generate wealth of over Rs. 25,000 crore a year for the nation and
also generate employment opportunities for millions of youths.
f have given a few examples of notable scientific technological
and societal accomplishments. There may be many more successes
of this nature. The members of the Press must be sensitive to such
accomplishments and celebrate them with full vigour. This will
definitely motivate many institutions to emulate the innovative
developments in their own regions.
I have a suggestion particularly to the members of press consisting
of editors, journalists, correspondents and reporters, in our country
it is essential to have research wings in the academic institutions
developing media personnel in reporting news, event analysis and
highlights. The owners of newspapers should encourage research being
carried out by experienced and young reporters for acquiring post
graduate qualifications which will improve the quality of content of
the print media. For example, before any issue is discussed in foreign
newspapers, they send it to an internal research group where data is
studied, verified and factual news is generated and sent for publication.
When there was a critical comment about outsourcing to India, a US
journalist stayed in India and studied the issue and found out that the
companies engaged in Business Process Outsourcing (BPOs) were
carrying out business using imported equipment from UK and USA.
Thus, they found that the BPO industries provided an indirect market
for the hardware industries of US. Immediately this was reported in
the Indian media in a big way. Similarly a Discovery Channel media
person wanted to study India's growth in Information Technology,
Thomas Friedman came to India and stayed for a month and visited
Bangalore and other places. Based on his news analysis he wrote a
book titled "World is Flat". This book has become famous not only
634 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
in India but throughout the world. Such is the power of research. I
would suggest our Indian newspaper agencies should encourage research
being carried out by our correspondents and journalists within India
in academic research institutions, which will definitely improve the
quality of our reporting.
On conducting a quick search on the internet, I could not find an
exclusive website of the Kolkata Press Club. In case you do not have
a separate website, it is very necessary that you should set up one to
ensure that all the members are updated with the latest happenings in
the Press Club as well as world-wide. It will also provide you with a
quick and cheap mode of information exchange. No one is better aware
than the Press about the advantages of information and communication
technology and I am sure the Press Club is already working on this if
they have not already done so.
I find that the Press Club is also very alive to the current problems
being faced by the country and have been organizing events on burning
social, political and national problems thus providing a forum for
exchange of ideas and opinions on these issues. I was very happy to
note that the Press club has highlighted the problem of HIV/AIDS by
organizing a joint workshop with the AIDS Prevention Society. As
you are aware, Kolkata is high on the HIV risk list and therefore, all
such efforts need to be encouraged and highlighted.
In the present development context of the nation, I would like
the Press to take up the following missions for immediate
1. A Press movement: Developed West Bengal before 2020.
2. Press becoming a development partner in the programme
of PURA (Providing Urban amenities in Rural Area) -
connectivity is the focus.
3. Celebrating every aspect of the success of the State and the
Nation particularly in rural areas.
4. Evolutions of corruption-free India before 2010. Particularly,
I have started a movement of administering an Oath among
the youth which states, "I will lead an honest life free from
all corruption and will set an example for others to adopt a
transparent way of life."
5. Promoting an enlightened society, which means education
with value system, transforming religion into a spiritual force
and building economic prosperity of the nation based on
its core competence. For this mission, a unique world body
6. Press should bring honur to the womanhood.
7. Scanning and digitizing all old issues of the print media
since its establishment and store in a digital library to preserve
our national heritage and make it available for research.
A nation without a vision is just like a ship in the ocean without
an engine for powering and sails (rudder) for direction. Fortunately,
India's youth power is the engine that gives the thrust to the movement
towards growth. The Press can certainly give a positive direction for
development by becoming the multiple sails of the ship.
The Members of Press Club of Kolkata may undertake the task
of motivating every citizen in Bengal and other parts of the nation to
work towards transforming India into a developed nation well before
2020. This is the mission which has to be done unitedly by the entire
press organisation. They have to use the special communication skill
unique to each region and language. Once again let me greet you all
on the occasion of the Diamond Jubilee Celebrations of Kolkata Press
Club and wish you success in your mission of igniting the minds of
our youth for making positive contribution towards the development
Electronic Connectivity of a Billion People
J AM DELIGHTED to address the General Assembly of International
Union of Radio Science (URSI). My greetings to the organizers
and ail the members participating in the General Assembly. Today I
would like to talk to you on the topic "Electronic Connectivity of a
The total land area of India is around 3.3 million square kilometre
with 7000 kilometre of coast line. The altitude of the country varies
from the sea level to 8,600 metre. The entire area is spread into deserts,
hilltops, mountain tops, sea shores, islands, valleys and plains. Out
of the billion plus population in the country 70% live in 600,000
villages. India is poised to become a knowledge society. Electronic
and knowledge connectivity is the key to realize this goal. Connecting
one billion people throws up multiple challenges. Now I would like
to discuss the relationship between societal transformation and electronic
connectivity. It also means the connectivities for a sixth of our planet's
population. Perhaps these thoughts may serve as a model for your
The core of this model for electronic connectivity for prosperity
of one billion people is the partnership between governmental and
multiple institutions in the public and private domains. The strength
of this partnership for collaborative growth and economic prosperity
is facilitated by free flow of knowledge and information in a seamless
manner cutting across levels and boundaries embracing all walks of
life in the three sectors of the economy such as agriculture,
manufacturing and services sector.
In this model, the inter-connectivity between these three sectors
of the economy is brought about by four grids: namely, Knowledge
Address to the General Assembly of International Union of Radio Science (URSI),
New Delhi, 25 October 2005
Grid, the Rural (7,000 PURA) Grid, Health Grid and the Governance
Grid. Each grid is a system of multiple portals. The aim is to maximize
gross domestic production and productivity of the land and people
through maximizing the performance of each sector, synergized by
the system of inter and intra-sectorai electronic connectivity to serve
one billion people. This will bring prosperity to 700 million people
in the rural areas and 300 million plus people in the urban areas. In
the process, it will ensure that the lives of 260 million people will be
uplifted from below the poverty line.
Societal transformation and economic growth are interlinked.
Knowledge societies enrich information society through innovation.
Information society enriches agriculture and manufacturing through
value addition. The whole purpose of education in a country is to
develop and enhance the potential of our human resource and
progressively transform it into a knowledge society. The knowledge
society will be a society producing products and services that are
rich in both explicit and tacit knowledge, thus creating value added
products. The real capital of this knowledge society will be its knowledge
workers. The society will be highly networked to create knowledge-
intensive environment along with enabling process to efficiently create,
share, use and protect knowledge. Our education system should re
align itself at the earliest to meet the needs of the present-day challenges
and be fully geared to participate in the societal transformation.
When the world was moving from the industrial to information
and knowledge era, we witnessed a changing pattern in the sectoral
share of GDP and the number of people employed in each sector. The
sectoral share of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) percentage has
undergone a considerable change. Contribution of agriculture to India's
GDP has come down from 39% to 22% during the period 1979 to
2005. During the same period contribution of manufacturing sector
has moved from 24% to 27% whereas the contribution from the services
sector has increased from 37% to 51%. There has been considerable
change in the employment pattern also. The percentage of people
employed in agriculture has come down from 64% to 54%.
Simultaneously, the percentage of people employed in manufacturing
has gone up from 15% to 19% and in the service sector from 20% to
638 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
27%. This trend has to continue and by 2020 our employment pattern
should aim at 44% in agriculture, 21% in manufacturing and 35% in
The displacement of 10% people from agriculture sector has to
be facilitated through skill enabling for undertaking value added tasks
in the rural enterprises so that migration to urban area is reduced.
Instead of persons from the rural areas going to urban towns in search
of jobs in manufacturing and services sectors, PURA (Providing Urban
Amenities in Rural Areas) facilitates creation of employment in the
rural area itself. PURA achieves this by providing physical, electronic
and knowledge connectivities to a cluster of villages thereby leading
to their economic connectivity and prosperity. Knowledge creation
and knowledge utilisation is the key to the success of a PURA
programme. Now I would like to talk about the characteristics of the
I was studying different dimensions of knowledge society to see
how would it be different from the industrial economy. In the knowledge
economy the objective of a society changes from fulfilling the basic
needs of all round development to empowerment. The education
system instead of going by text book teaching will be promoted by
creative, interactive self-learning - formal and informal with focus
on values, merit and quality. The workers instead of being skilled or
semi-skilled will be knowledgeable, self-empowered and flexibly
skilled. The type of work instead of being structured and hardware
driven will be less structured and software driven. Management style
will be delegative rather than being directive. Impact on environment
and ecology will be strikingly less compared to industrial economy.
Finally, the economy will be knowledge driven and not industry driven.
India is now in the process of creating virtual universities and
institutions for knowledge sharing, knowledge dissemination and
knowledge reuse. While it is known that the Virtual Universities
provide us with technologies of the future and the most economic
way of scaling high quality education in the country, they are no
substitute to the campus based education. The challenge before the
Virtual Universities is to provide the best of breed of both the worlds.
In this process, we could plan an optimum mix of direct contact hours
between the students and the teachers and also amongst the students
themselves. These interactions should also be used as a platform to
excite the students to take to learning in the new paradigm.
In the world of Virtual Universities the equitable access to all its
participants is the primary goal. Unlike in the real world where the
equitable access is always the democratic average, in the Virtual
Universities the equitable access always means the equitable access
to the best resources - be it the teachers, be it the library, be it the
laboratory, available across the network. In effect, the network brings
the best of its participants to every one of its participants. The three
phases of learning are the lectures, library and laboratories. They require
increasing bandwidth from a few 100's of kilobytes for the lectures
to a few megabytes for the formal digital libraries and the informal
world of knowledge from the Internet, to gigabits of connectivity for
remote laboratories in the world of high precision science and
engineering. As the bandwidth becomes cheaper and available in
abundance, universities should be able to run remote instruments and
facilities as complex as NMR to wind tunnels. These are applications
that can make a difference in how we engage in teaching, learning,
and research in higher education.
The world is moving towards internet2 applications. Internet2
applications require advanced networks. That is, these applications
will not run across commercial Internet connections. Internet2
applications require enhanced networking functionality - such as high
bandwidth, low latency (delay), or multicast - not available on our
commercial Internet connections. Internet2 is about everything we
do in higher education. Therefore, we encourage and support applications
development in all disciplines from the sciences through arts and
humanities. Whether you are in the classroom, the laboratory, the
library, or the dorm, you should be able to access Internet applications
This will ultimately provide equitable access to the entire education
system beyond just the lectures and the lecturers. Thus the bandwidth
640 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
is the demolisher of imbalances and a great leveller in the knowledge
society. We have rich knowledge institutions but what we have to
add is connectivity. This connectivity today is technologically possible
but would need creation of high bandwidth reliable network
infrastructure to the extent of minimum 10 Gigabits per second all
through the country to provide uniform access of knowledge in different
regions leading to the creation of Knowledge Grid.
Emet is the Educational and Research Network of India connecting
1500 institutions for internet and intra connectivity for email and other
collaboration. Presently ERNET is connecting around 45 institutions
across the country in a high bandwidth network with 100 mbps
connectivity under the GARUDA project. This will become the part
of the proposed Knowledge Grid.
So far I have discussed with you knowledge institutions. Now I
would like to discuss on establishing the next network in the system
of Grids across the country, namely, Health Grid.
Indian Space Research Organization through their INSAT network
has connected 25 major hospitals in the mainland. From there they
are providing telemedicine connectivity to remote areas including
our islands. Rashtrapati Bhavan Clinic is also connected to the CARE
Hospitals Hyderabad through telemedicine facility. Also there are a
number of public and private initiatives, such as AIIMS, Apollo,
Narayana Hridayalaya, Sankara Nethralaya, and Aravind Hospitals.
There are exclusive tele-medicines etc. The mission of telemedicine
with multiple grid is gaining momentum and it will spread to all the
equipped Primary Health Centres in the country, medical colleges
and research institutions in due course.
We need to establish a Health Grid, connecting the various health
care institutions with regard to the super speciality and general medicine
areas. Also health care training institutes, nurses, para-medical staff
and doctors and the medical research institutions need to be networked
to health grid. This will enable unique case studies and experiences
to be exchanged between the super specialists through this health
grid. It will also be possible to conduct conferences of specialist
doctors from multi-centres to discuss the critical disease patterns and
provide treatment. In Rashtrapati Bhavan Website, we have a Virtual
Vision applet, which will speech enable any website for the benefit
of visually challenged persons. Thousands of people have already
downloaded it and are using it.
As you are aware, with the arrival of space technology there has
been an explosive growth of many low bandwidth networks for specific
missions. There is a need to integrate the available networks and
Let me first describe my personal experience in setting up and
operating a typical e-Governance Portal established at Rashtrapati
Rashtrapati Bhavan has introduced connectivity with our citizens,
institutions, universities, government departments and multi-lateral
agencies during the last three years. For enabling such connectivity,
all the important events in which the President participates are brought
out in the website (www.presidentofmdia.nic.in) as soon as the functions
are over. Today, on an average, this website has a hit rate of over
250,000 per day. On certain special occasions, like Independence Day,
Republic Day, it touches nearly a million hits. In addition, I receive
over 500 e-mails and 500 letters on an average from various people
from all over the country and abroad. I also receive hundreds of questions
from the students and children every day. We have built in an e-
Governance system to study all the correspondence on a day to day
basis, analyze, prioritize, verify and determine the action requirements
to be taken by Rashtrapati Bhavan and other agencies of government
and the relevant institutions both public and private. We have now
established a less paper dynamic and secured workflow system for
the file movements. As the part of the e-Govemance portal inauguration
all the departments within Rashtrapati Bhavan were connected and
the school, Clinic, Garage located in the President Estate were also
connected. We have a Fibre broadband POP (Point of Presence) which
can connect up to 64 Mbps. We have established within Rashtrapati
Bhavan facilities for G2G and G2C connectivity and we are in the
process of establishing the high bandwidth broadband VPN connectivity
642 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
with Central and State Governments and other relevant institutions
for seamless flow of information within the existing systems and
procedures of Governmental functioning. This will soon become the
part of the e-Governance Grid.
Connectivity and Collaboration at RB: Apart from this we have
had interactive collaborative conference with a number of institutions
in India and abroad. The typical among these are:
a. Interactive sessions with engineering students of Punjab
colleges through VS AT and Leased Line.
b. IGNOU connectivity to 100 locations through EDUSAT.
So far we have connected 40 locations.
c. Inauguration of Virtual University of Madras, Calcutta and
Mumbai Universities with Anna University, Madurai Kamaraj
University, 40 learning centres of IGNOU. Where I took
the inaugural class through EDUSAT, tele-education delivery
system and the multimedia studio at Rashtrapati Bhavan
using PowerPoint presentation for over 15,000 students and
answered over 20 questions, referred my talk from the website,
referred some pages from two books from RB digital library,
drawn the GSLV and Payload in the smart board. A virtual
class room has been created during my one and a half hour
interaction. The EDUSAT provided the necessary
connectivity for the tasks.
d. Interaction with the Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburg,
USA for Digital Library conference through Internet, three
inaugural addresses through video conference with US
e. PAN African Network - a Tele-Education Delivery system
presentation to 28 African Union ambassadors through
EDUSAT and Wi-MAX connectivity using the tele-education
f. 25 national and international conferences in India through
VS AT, ISDN with interactive sessions with educationists,
teachers, space scientists, doctors, business communities
through NASSCOM, judiciary and science writers.
g. Interaction with Amrita Village Resources Centres and Kerala
schools through EDUSAT, Loni Village connectivity through
h. Interaction with Periyar PURA and MSSRF Village
During these interactive discussions and conferences, I have
used all the available electronic connectivities through VS AT, EDUSAT,
and Eeased lines, ISDN, Internet and Wi-MAX. Presently all these
connectivities are fully established at Rashtrapati Bhavan and are highly
effective. With the last three years of experience, I realize that to
promote effective, quality and actionable communication we have to
use multi-media comprehensively. This will be determined by the
No country has so far implemented an e-governance system for
one billion people. It is a big challenge before us. Fet us take an
example to clarify the connectivity challenges of the country.
Good governance is being recognized as an important goal by
many countries across the world. They have taken up specific initiatives
for open government. Freedom of information is being redefined and
supported by detailed guidelines. The internet revolution has proved
to be a powerful tool for good governance initiatives. An important
dimension of the internet potential is the possibility of providing services
any time anywhere. Along with this there is a conscious effort to put
the citizen as the centre of focus of the governance. Citizens are being
perceived as customers and clients. E-governance has to be citizen
friendly. Delivery of services to citizens is considered as a primary
function of the government. Particularly in a democratic nation of a
billion people like India, e-Governance should enable seamless access
to information and seamless flow of information across the state and
central government in the federal set-up.
I visualize an election scenario, where a candidate files his
nomination from a particular constituency. Immediately the election
officer verifies his/her authenticity from the national citizen ID database
through multifactor authentication, through a multipurpose Citizen
ID card. His education credentials come from the university records.
644 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
His track record of employment comes from various employers with
whom he had worked. His income and wealth resources come from
the income-tax department, and other sources. His property record
comes from the registration of land authority across the country. His
credit history comes form various credit institutions like banks. His/
her civic consciousness and citizenship behaviour comes from the
police crime record. His legal track records come from the judicial
All the details arrive at the computer terminal of the election
officer within a few seconds automatically by the act of e-Governance
software agents which crawls across the various state and central
government web services directories through the network Grid and
collects the information automatically and presents the facts in real
time without any bias. Artificial intelligence software analyses his
credentials and gives a rating on how successful he will be as a politician.
Election officer sitting at the remote block of the country decides on
the spot and the election process starts. All the voters vote from their
home through virtual polling booths. Is it a dream? Is it possible? If
possible, when shall we have it? Can we provide good governance to
our one billion people? Can the governance speed up the delivery
system? Can the governance differentiate between genuine transactions
and spurious transactions? Can the governance ensure immediate action
for the genuine cases which satisfy the check list for a particular service
and pend the action on spurious transactions? Can this be done by e-
governance at a cost affordable by our nation? If we have this system
implemented then I can call this as a true e-Governance system for
NICNET in India is providing connectivity to Government
organizations using 2-8 mbps connectivity. It also has an internet
data centre with 80 terra bytes of storage and more than 150 servers
connected for the missions such as election data and event oriented
projects for the government organizations.
To establish a system what I have visualized, we need a high
bandwidth broadband connectivity across the many Government
departments such as State and District Administration, Election
Commission, Universities, Banks, Home/Police Departments, Insurance
companies etc. This scenario requires vertical and horizontal grid
established across various institutions. Hence, we can draw information
and feed information from these Grids for seamless flow of data to
achieve the goal of good governance.
For providing the knowledge connectivity to the PURA complexes,
Village Knowledge Centres will act as frontline delivery system. I
visualize establishment of village knowledge centre in the Village
Panchayat to empower the villagers with the knowledge and to act as
a local centre for knowledge connectivity for the villagers within the
overall framework of PURA.
The Village Knowledge Centre should provide the essential data
required for the targeted population such as farmers, fishermen,
craftsmen, traders, businessmen, entrepreneurs, unemployed youth
and the students. It has to be acquired by visiting the village, talking
to the rural people, by understanding their requirement and core
competence. Providing meteorological data for both farmers and
fishermen has to be area specific, covering say 20 or 30 villages in
the vicinity of sea coast or in the farming area. Local relevance of
information offered is essential. Users have simple needs of information
but often it is a tough problem for system integrators because of the
need of updation of data. Trained manpower with experience have to
be deployed to generate information which can explain to the people
in simple terms the meteorological data, weather data, marketing data
on fish, agricultural and other rural commodities. These data have to
come from various connected institutions which provide the service
to the people on a timely basis periodically. But the transformation
of data into user friendly information on a regular updated basis is
the real challenge. The main focus of the Village Knowledge Centre
should be to empower the youth to undertake development tasks of
the villages and establish the rural enterprises which will provide
large scale employment to the youth of the village. So, it is essential
to skill-enable and knowledge-enable through the academic institutions,
industry, banking and marketing institutions. VKC should act as a
facilitator. Blended knowledge is a better knowledge.
646 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
A low cost multi-task hand-held computer with GPS and wireless
mobility should be developed by the private industries and organizations
and should reach the fishermen and farmers in different parts of the
country. They should add value to this tool for their benefit to increase
their earning capacity. Village Knowledge Centre should have a
computer terminal, wireless (Wi-Max) connections or fibre broadband
or satellite connectivity to connect to the Nodal Centres for acquisition
of knowledge and dissemination of updated real time data.
Each PURA should have "Nodal PURA Knowledge Data centres",
which should be the Hub for all the activities creating the vibrancy in
the PURA as a viable sustainable business proposition. These "Nodal
PURA Knowledge Data Centres" should be linked to the nominated
domain service providing organizations in agriculture including
fisheries, cottage and small scale industries and commerce, Education
and human resource development and health care sectors. These domain
institutions will have a mechanism to create continuously updated
information systems needed to service the Village Knowledge Centres.
With this experience, we should make the village resource centres
as the knowledge centres in the villages in a fully connected environment
with a mission of skill and knowledge enabling people leading to
sustainable economic development in the rural areas.
I have studied a system which is working and used by the farmers
and fishermen in different parts of the country. This is called the Kisan
Call Centre (KCC) established by the Ministry of Agriculture in
partnership with TCIL (Telecommunication Consultant India Ltd) a
Government Enterprise under Ministry of Communication and
Kisan Call Centre offers three levels of interaction and support
in agriculture, fisheries and animal husbandry domains through the
nationally nominated experts and corresponding directorates at the
Central level. In the last one year of its operation the call centre has
provided consultancy, information, assistance and guidance to over
half a million callers from the villages of eight States. Anywhere in
India, people can call 1551 as a toll free number to get the services.
The top users of the scheme are Maharastra and Tamil Nadu followed
by UP and Rajasthan.
As we have seen in the Kisan Call Centre set-up, similar Domain
Service Provider Call centres are required in the field of Commerce
and Industry, Entrepreneurial Skill Development and Employment
Generation, Travel and Tourism, Banking and Insurance, Meteorological
Forecasting, Disaster Warning systems, Education and Human Resource
Development and Health Care.
These call centres will act as a service provider to the PURA
Nodal Knowledge Data Centres located in the PURA Complexes,
which in turn will provide the area specific and customized knowledge
to the Village Knowledge Centres in the villages in a holistic manner.
This delivery will depend on the availability of robust connectivity
to different parts of the country. This forms the PURA Grids which
draw information from the other Grids and will act as a catalyst for
the societal transformation in the rural areas.
So far I have discussed with you the necessity for establishing
various Grids by citing examples on how connectivity is important in
e-Govemance and knowledge institutions. Now I would like to discuss
how to connect all the Grids across the country to fulfil the mission
objective of entering into a knowledge society.
So far we have discussed the connectivities within the various
proposed grids, that is, intra-grid connectivities. However, to maximize
the synergy between the grids, leading to maximization of GDP and
productivity, there is need for inter-grid connectivities, which may
be called as Societal Grid. Knowledge sharing, knowledge utilization
and knowledge re-use is very vital by all constituents of the society
for promoting non-linear growth. Societal Grid consists of:
1. Inter connecting universities with socio-economic institutions,
industries and R&D organizations.
2. Inter-connecting the Health Care institutions of Government,
corporate and super specialty hospitals, research institutions,
648 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
educational institutions and ultimately, pharma R & D
3. Inter-connecting the Central Government and State
Governments and District and Block level offices for G2G
4. Connecting the PURA Nodal centres with the village
knowledge centres and domain service providers. Since
this is the backbone for rural development, all other Grids
will infuse the knowledge into this Grid for sustainable
development, health care and good governance. For example,
five of the Periyar PURA villages have now connected using
5. Will act as an inter-connected delivery mechanism for tele
education, tele-medicine and e-Governance services apart
from individual access by the people, within and between
the Village Knowledge Centres through the PURA Grid.
These connectivity Grids will connect the billion people using
the network available such as VS AT, fibre broadband, wireless and
through mobile phones. Many options exist for the last mile connectivity
in India. While wireless 802.11 and 802.16, the Wi-Fi and Wi-Max
are becoming very popular everywhere, we still feel that there are
enough opportunities for the fibre to the home users as well. This is
due to the fact that the cost of fibre has come down drastically as also
the cost of laying the cables. This has the potential to give near terabit
connectivity or almost unlimited bandwidth to every rural and urban
In India we already have more than 400 channels of TV being
beamed to every home. The Direct to Home (DTH) TV has become a
reality. Imagine the high speed fibre to the home carrying all the
entertainment, education, e-governance, e-commerce, health care,
newspaper, telephone and all other forms of text, voice and video
data, both synchronous and asynchronous data being pumped in and
out through the fibre to the house! This will create a world of unlimited
in order to make the country the most advanced knowledge society,
we should aim at making the bandwidth available without hindrance
and at no cost. Making the bandwidth available is like the Government
laying the roads. Movement of materials through these roads creates
wealth in the industrial economy and the government recovers more
than the investment on the roads by way of taxes and enhanced prosperity
of its people. In the modem digital economy driven by knowledge
products, bits and bytes traverse the network and create wealth and
this will recover the cost of investments in the bandwidth.
The electronic connectivity for one billion people must transform
into a network and provide a seamless access between
the knowledge creator that is the Universities, Institutions
The R & D institutions, Public and Private sector industries
that convert knowledge into products and services; and
The knowledge consumer that is the citizen.
With the dawn of the twenty-first century, the world has entered
an era of depleting energy and water resources. Endemic oil shortages
are looming large and need for renewable energy substitutes, such as
bio-diesel has become mandatory. However, a massive programme
for production of bio-diesel calls for deep integration and system
engineering between various sectors of the economy.
To illustrate India's response to the oil crisis, as it affects our
transportation sector, let us take large scale mission in Jetropha
plantations for generation of bio-fuel partially or totally substituting
diesel. The Jetropha plantation technology and methods are provided
to the farmers by the agricultural university. Tne R & D institutions
in the country work on converting Jetropha seeds into bio-fuel and
by-products and also enhancing the combustion efficiency of internal
combustion engines mnning on bio-fuel. Rural small scale industries
will establish enterprises for producing bio-fuel and marketing it. The
Rural Development and Agricultural Ministry in co-ordination with
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and the State Governments
would need to provide the policy framework for pricing and use of
650 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
bio-fuel. Also, there is a need for the University to work on the
development of a variety of hybrid seeds for increasing the productivity
of oil from the seeds. These complex interactions between various
institutions have to take place as public-private partnership through
electronic connectivity. Such a model is being developed and there
are indications that the work already done in five states is accelerating
unprecedented progress in this area over the last one year.
Thus we can see there is a closed cycle between the farmer,
researcher, educational institutions, industry, government and the user
requiring variety of knowledge input at different stages which can be
made available effectively only if all these institutions are brought
under knowledge grid and a common communication protocol with
high speed access is made available to them.
Connectivity is the key to the conversion of billion people into
members of knowledge society. Connectivity for the billion people
is the connectivity of the planet; it means we are connecting 600,000
villages in a single country. This experience will become the foundation
for other continents. The major effort should be towards making the
bandwidth free and unlimited and available on demand for a billion
people. Bandwidth will determine the prosperity level of our country.
My best wishes to the members of International Union of Radio
Sciences in their mission of working towards a fully connected
prosperous, safe and happy planet.
India and The World
India-Tanzania - Mutual Friendship
y EXTEND MY greetings to you and to the people of Tanzania. It is
an honour for me to be in your midst today in your beautiful country.
I would like to thank you for the very warm welcome given to me
and to our delegation on arrival in Dar-es-Salaam. I am sure that my
visit will strengthen our mutual friendship and solidarity. India has
always had a special place for Tanzania in its foreign policy. Similarly
Tanzania has a special place for India.
A geographical distance exists between our nations, but there
are many commonalities between us. Some 2000 years ago, Indian
travellers began sailing across the Indian Ocean to reach the East
African coast mainly for the purpose of trade and commerce. Their
small and sometimes sporadic ventures became more regular in the
early 19th century. This is the result of the Indian philosophy.
It means, the whole world is our home, and every person in the
world is a kith and kin. This process led to many Indians making
your great nation as their home, leading to the creation of a pluralist
and multi-religious society, which is a shining example of the African
continent. I understand that the immigrant community has made many
contributions to the economic and social development of your nation,
especially in trade and industry. I am told that some of them even
participated in Tanzania's Independence Movement. As we in India
had struggled to rid ourselves of the colonial yoke, we also watched
the continued dominance of Africa by colonial forces with concern
and extended our full support for your freedom movement.
Ever since you attained your freedom, we in India have seen
with admiration your nation's uninterrupted march as a standard bearer
of unity, democracy, civilian rule, social cohesion and stability. The
Speech at the Banquet hosted by the President of Tanzania, Tanzania, 11 September

654 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Father of the Nation, Mwalimu Julius Nyerere's role and leadership
in the fight against colonialism and racism is very well known in our
country. Mwalimu Julius Nyerere was for long years in the vanguard
of the anti-colonial struggle, racism and apartheid. Mwalimu Julius
Nyerere and our first Prime Minister Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru laid
the foundations for our strong mutual understanding on a wide cross-
section of major global issues. This mutual understanding also extended
to areas of vital interest to each other. Our leaders have since maintained
a regular exchange of visits at the highest levels.
You have visited India in December 2002, which we remember
with happiness. That led to the nucleation of a number of proposals
for promoting bi-lateral relationship between our countries. I am visiting
the African Continent when we together face the challenge of
globalization and rapid technological advancement. Globalization today
is a reality and a compulsion and the challenge is to implement policies,
which cause minimum social disruption in our developmental process.
In this, your visionary leadership is evident, Mr. President, as you
have been a unanimous choice for the Co-chairmanship of the World
Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalization.
Tanzania is a symbol of the evolving aspirations of a resurgent
Africa wishing to pursue a democratic path for responsible governance
and finding internal solutions to regional conflicts. Your country is a
firm supporter of regional organizations and co-operation reflected
by your personal efforts to revitalize regional integration efforts through
institutions such as the South African Development Community and
the East African Community. We in India are interested in seeing the
robust economic development of your nation. We are very happy to
note that Tanzania's economy has grown at a rate of about 5.5% in
recent years, which is one of the highest rates of growth in Africa.
Your government like ours has its major focus on economic reforms,
liberalization, development and poverty alleviation.
Mr. President, my nation is also determined to forge ahead on
the fast track of progress. We have a vision to become a developed
nation by the year 2020. We are focusing on five areas of importance
in an integrated manner. These are education and health care, agriculture
INDIA AND THE WORLD 655
and food processing, information and communication technology,
infrastructure development and self-sufficiency in critical technologies.
Both our nations have to face the challenges of the new millennium
jointly through the strengthening of institutions. Tanzania has been a
steady co-partner with India on this journey. There is an urgent need
to democratize the functioning of the United Nations and the Security
Council through its expansion to reflect the new global realities. One
of the biggest challenges of the new millennium is the rise of terrorism
across the globe, which is being experienced by every nation. We in
India are determined to fight it. Terrorism has the potential to damage
economies and the social harmony of open societies like ours. We in
India understand your concerns on this account as terrorism in your
neighbourhood can have an adverse impact on your tourism industry
When I am back in the African continent, in your beautiful country,
with many rivers and lakes including the Nile, I remember the poem
which occurred to me while we sailed in the Blue Nile and reached
the confluence of White and Blue Nile at Khartoum. Let me recite a
small part of that poem: ...When we rivers confluence Oh humanity
why not your hearts confluence And you blossom with happiness. ...
It has been translated in Arabic by one of the Professors in Sudan.
Today, Mr. President, in the new evolving world, co-operation
between India and Tanzania has taken new shape. Tanzanian students
are making use of India's educational programmes. India's higher
educational infrastructure is being made use of by many of your students
who are enrolled in various institutions of learning. A sizeable number
of Tanzanian students are studying in Bangalore, which is one of our
prime information technology centres with world class IT companies
operating from this city.
Tanzania and India can work on their many commonalities to
develop synergies, which can lead to a win-win situation for both
nations. Tanzania has minerals such as gold, diamonds and the semi
precious stone - Tanzanite. India has the expertise to process and
add value to these minerals. Co-operation in this area could be thought
of. Joint ventures could be worked out in the field of power generation
656 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
where we have experience in handling large grids. India can provide
support in developing your nation's hydel power potential through
induction of necessary inputs. Co-operation in the development of
Tanzania's railway network can be thought of as India has one of the
largest railway networks in the world. India's expertise and experience
in operating a large railway network can be utilized by Tanzania to
help it provide greater connectivity with its neighbouring countries.
The oil and natural gas sector can be another area with promise in
which avenues for co-operation can be explored. Since independence,
India has achieved agricultural self-sufficiency and developed
capabilities in this sector. India is willing to extend help in this sector
by sharing its experience of growing hybrid varieties of rice and maize,
which would be suitable for your land. On our part, we would like to
gain from the experience of Tanzania in managing its world-famous
wildlife sanctuaries and utilizing the associated eco-tourism potential.
I am visiting the island Zanzibar tomorrow and meeting the
President of Zanzibar and his team. Also I will interact with the people
of Zanzibar. I am sure it will be a memorable visit.
Excellency, before I end, I would like to take this opportunity to
convey my greetings and that of my delegation for the warm and
friendly hospitality that you have extended. This has further strengthened
the deep bonds of friendship between our nations and their people.
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, may I now request you to
join me in a toast to the:
health and well being of His Excellency President Mkapa
and Madam Anna Benjamin Mkapa;
progress and prosperity of the friendly people of Tanzania;
further consolidation and strengthening of the traditional
friendship between India and Tanzania.
India-Zanzibar - A Common Linkage
J AM DELIGHTED to meet the people of Zanzibar. This gathering
includes a number of members of Indian community whose ancestors
came to this island more than a century ago and settled down and
engaged in many commercial activities.
When I landed at Zanzibar, I could see the beauty of this island
and now I am seeing the beautiful minds of the people of Zanzibar.
India and Zanzibar are connected by the Indian Ocean and the waves
are reminding us all the time about our common linkage. When I am
in this great island, I too was reminded of my birthplace and childhood
in the Rameswaram island. I used to see two major activities: people
fishing for their daily lives and another the great temple that attracted
tourists daily from all over India and abroad. 1 saw harmony among
the people of different religions and people coming as tourists. Here
also I am seeing you living in harmony and brotherhood.
Over the years, Zanzibar had provided you a certain way of life.
In return you all have a responsibility to provide certain goods and
services to this country, which can make this country prosperous. I
would therefore, recommend to all of you to carry out your tasks
with dedication, commitment and loyalty. This will enable you to
prosper in the days to come. Also, your children will imbibe these
precious qualities which is essential for their future life. I would like
to give some of my thoughts on the economic activity of this country
that is indirectly relevant to your growth.
I understand that Zanzibar is famous for three things: clove, fish
and fish products, and tourism. The conventional methods of marketing
these products and services need certain change. Value addition for
clove and fishing may provide better revenue and wealth generation.
Address during the Interaction with the People of Zanzibar, Zanzibar, 12 September

658 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
All of you can certainly contribute with new ideas through which
these trades in this region can flourish.
I would like to share with you the experience of fishing industry
in a sea-coast country. Satellite images identify where there is a large
fish concentration. There, a ship goes and catches lot of fish and stores
in the deck. This catch is transferred to another ship, which carries
out the entire process of cleaning, cutting and processing. The third
ship comes and collects the entire packaged value added goods from
the second ship for transporting it into the international market.
I visualize a similar situation in this island in the form of fish
getting processed, valued added, packed and delivered to the market.
This will boost up the economy of the Zanzibar and provide better
living conditions for the people.
This island is one of the famous locations and sought-after place
for many tourists from east and west. Tourism can be promoted through
provision of quality infrastructure and facilities for the tourists. One
area all the tourists strive for is to get reliable information about various
tourist spots, their accessibility and how to add value to their stay in
the country. Only people friendly tourist officers can provide this. I
would recommend that some of you could take up the task of
documenting the entire tourist map and provide value added information
through research. Such an information base will attract many more
tourists to this country which will be an asset for the country and it
will provide adequate compensation and employment opportunities
for all of you. Of course, the Government of Zanzibar will further
improve the necessary infrastructure at various tourist locations to
attract many more tourists from abroad.
I understand you have good schools in Zanzibar which provide
quality education up to the level of 10+2. However, you seem to have
certain problems for educating children in colleges. There are a number
of distance education centres in India who are providing higher education
within the country and certain centres abroad. I would recommend
extension of higher education facilities for Zanzibar children through
tele-education by Indian distance education centres. Indian High
INDIA AND THE WORLD 659
Commission in consultation with the educational authorities can work
For overall development of citizens and success in whatever
profession you pursue, righteousness in thinking, conduct and action
is the key. I would like to recite a divine hymn, which I heard in a
Where there is righteousness in the heart
There is beauty in the character.
When there is beauty in the character,
there is harmony in the home.
When there is harmony in the home.
There is an order in the nation.
When there is order in the nation,
There is peace in the world.
My best wishes to all of you for growth and prosperity in your
profession and family life. May God bless you.
Evolution of Empowered Society
J AM INDEED delighted to be in Moscow University and address
the students and faculty members of this prestigious University.
When I am in the University of Moscow, I realize that this university
has got a great tradition and history. It has been established in the
year 1755. Just when I was entering into your campus, I am reminded
of an event which took place a few weeks back in India.
I witnessed on 27th April 2005, in the Rashtrapati Bhavan, an
agreement being signed between three Indian Universities which are
hundred and fifty years old namely University of Madras, University
of Bombay and University of Calcutta for reinforcing the curriculum
of each other, enhancing the research programmes and quality of
teaching through synergy between the Universities for transforming
them into great educational centres of 21st century. The similarity
between the University of Moscow and the three Universities is that
all have a long history and tradition but the three Indian Universities
are younger by hundred years in comparison to University of Moscow.
There are also a few other institutions of learning and scholarship in
India which have a long tradition. With its innate strengths in
humanities, arts, science, technology and culture Moscow University
and our three Universities can have co-operative programmes for
exchanging teachers, researchers and students. Even we can establish
a school of societal transformation which can transform our nations
We have multiple societies in every nation starting from agricultural
society, industrial society, and information society leading to knowledge
society. During the 20th century, societies underwent a change from
the agricultural society, where manual labour was the critical factor,
to the industrial society, where the management of technology, capital,
Address at Moscow State University, Moscow, 23 May 2005
INDIA AND THE WORLD 661
and labour provided the competitive advantage. The information era
was born in the last decade. Networking within the country and with
the other nations and the software products drove the economies. Some
of the nations including India utilized this opportunity. In this decade
we are just entering into knowledge society era.
The uniqueness of knowledge society is enriching the information
society with innovation and value addition of products. The knowledge
also enables value addition to the other three societies. In knowledge
society, knowledge is the primary production resource instead of capital
or labour. In India, I chaired a task team constituted by the Government
of India sometime back for evolving a road map for transforming the
Indian society into a knowledge society. I would like to discuss with
you how we can work together to make our societies enriched by
knowledge and transforming them into knowledge society.
Knowledge can create a comprehensive wealth for the nation
and also improve the quality of life, in the form of better health,
education, infrastructure, and other societal needs. The ability to create
and maintain a knowledge society infrastructure, develop the knowledge
workers, and enhance their producti vity through the creation, growth,
and utilization of new knowledge, will be the key factor in deciding
the prosperity of this knowledge society. Whether or not a nation has
developed into a knowledge society is judged by the way it creates
and deploys knowledge and skills in the sectors like ICT, manufacturing,
agriculture, health care and many services.
I was studying the dimensions of knowledge society and how
will it be different from the industrial economy. In the knowledge
economy the objective of a society changes from fulfilling the basic
needs of all round development to empowerment. The education system
instead of going by text book teaching will be promoted by creative,
interactive self learning, formal and informal with focus on values,
merit and quality. The workers instead of being skilled or semi-skilled
will be knowledgeable, self-empowered and flexibly skilled and would
adapt to newer technologies seamlessly. The type of work instead of
being structured and hardware driven will be less structured and software
driven. Management style will emphasize more on delegation rather
662 APJ ABDUL ICALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
than giving command. Impact on environment and ecology will be
strikingly less compared to the industrial economy.
Hence the economy will be knowledge and skill driven and not
by established industries. There will be continuous innovation and
enterprise. To realize this special capacity needs to be built in education
and nurtured among the students. The capacities which are required
to be built are research and enquiry, creativity and innovation, use of
high technology, entrepreneurial and moral leadership.
Research and enquiry: The 21st century is about the management
of all the knowledge and information we have generated and the value
addition we bring to it. We must give our students the skills with
which they find a way through the sea of knowledge that we have
created and continue with life long learning. Today, we have the ability,
through technology, to really and truly teach ourselves to become the
life-long learners. This is required for sustained economic development.
Creativity and innovation: The management of knowledge in
the 21st century is beyond the capacity of a single individual. The
amount of information that we have around is overwhelming. The
management of knowledge therefore must move out of the realm of
the individual and shift into the realm of the networked groups. The
students must learn how to manage knowledge collectively. When
the information is networked the power and utility of the information
grows as squared as predicted by Metcalfe's law. An information
that is static does not grow. In the new digital economy information
that is circulated creates innovation and contributes to national wealth.
Capacity to use high technology: Every student in our schools
should learn to know how to use the latest technologies for aiding
their learning process. Universities should equip themselves with
adequate computing equipment, laboratory equipments, and Internet
facilities and provide an environment for the students to enhance their
learning ability. In the midst of all of the technological innovations
and revolutions we cannot think that the role of the teachers will be
diminished. In fact the teacher will become even more important and
the whole world of education will become teacher assisted and would
INDIA AND THE WORLD 663
help in "tele-porting" the best teacher to every nook and corner of the
country and propagate the knowledge.
Entrepreneurship: The aptitude for entrepreneurship should be
cultivated right from the beginning and in the university environment.
We must teach our students to take calculated risks for the sake of
larger gain, but within the ethos of good business. They should also
cultivate a disposition to do things right. This capacity will enable
them to take up challenging tasks later.
Moral leadership: Moral leadership involves two aspects. First
it requires the ability to have compelling and powerful dreams or
visions of human betterment. Moral leadership requires a disposition
to do the right thing and influence others also to do right things.
In sum, inquiry, creativity, technology, entrepreneurial and moral
leadership are the five capacities required to be built through the
education process. If we develop in all our students these five capacities,
we will produce "Autonomous Learner" a self-directed, self-controlled,
lifelong learner who will have the capacity to both respect authority
and at the same time is capable of questioning authority in an appropriate
manner. These are the leaders who would work together as a "Self
organizing Network" and transform any nation into a prosperous nation.
Now I would like to discuss our Scientific Strengths.
Russia has got a tradition of strength in metallurgy. The periodic
table was given to the world by Mendeleev. You became the pioneers
in space launch systems by putting the Sputnik in the orbit. Kirchhoff
gave the Kirchhoff laws to the electrical network theorists. Kirchhoff
and Bunsen discovered two new elements, caesium and rubidium in
the course of their investigations. Kirchhoff was best known for being
the first to explain the dark lines in the sun's spectrum as caused by
absorption of particular wavelengths as the light passes through gases
in the sun's atmosphere. This work started a new era in astronomy.
Landau's contributions to theoretical physics are phenomenal. Korolov
was the rocket designer par excellence who launched the first modern
liquid-fuelled rocket in 1933. Konstantin Tsiolkovsky of Russia was
considered as one of the fathers of space exploration. Tsiolkovsky
blended the passion for space with hard mathematical calculations to
664 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
produce the vision for the future. He imagined a time when space
ships would be launched from the Earth to large space stations and
colonies; from there he proposed these ships would propel humanity
to explore the Moon and Mars. His thought has influenced many
space scientists and technologists.
Similarly another event which greatly influenced me in India
was a war between British in Sri Rangapatinam and one of the warriors
in India Tipu Sultan. Tipu Sultan, the ruler of Mysore State, in the
war against the British, used war rockets against the cavalries and
defeated the British force in 1792. He was the first in the world to
introduce rocket force in the Army. Though India was a latecomer in
the modern space activities, it is one of the five nations today which
placed its own satellite using indigenous GSLV. We in India also
remember the pioneering contributions to science made by
Chandrasekhar Subramaniam for his Chandrasekhar limit and black
hole, Sir C. V. Raman for his discovery of the "Raman effect", Srinivasa
Ramanujan for his contributions towards number theory, J.C. Bose
in the area of microwaves and Meghnad Saha for "Thermo-Ionization
Russia and India have a tradition of knowledge and have
civilizational strength. We also share a common vision of the world
of bringing prosperity, peace and partnerships to the whole of humanity.
Through these strengths and commonly shared vision, we can definitely
build a prosperous society. A prosperous society with civilizational
strength will lead to peace. Let us commence a new journey in this
planet to bring global peace and prosperity.
India-Ukraine - A Common Bond of
J WOULD LIKE to thank you for the warmth of your welcome and
the hospitality extended to me. 1 am honoured and privileged to
be in this ancient city of Kyiv, the cradle of a great civilization, which
has had a widespread impact in the region.
India and Ukraine share traditional ties of friendship, trust and
co-operation, which go back to many decades and have stood the test
of time. The common bond of democracy is a new link. The discussions
held between us today bear testimony to the strength of our close
partnership and re-affirms our friendly ties. We remember with gratitude
the work of Ukrainian engineers and scientists who helped us in our
national development and in the construction of what our former Prime
Minister called the "temples of modern India", our factories, steel
plants and hydro power projects. I am happy to note that India and
Ukraine have very productive exchanges and co-operation in the area
of science and technology and space. These exchanges have been to
our mutual benefit and I am confident that experts from both our
countries would continue to work together to strengthen these ties
and expand collaboration in new areas such as molecular biology,
genetics, stem cell research, information technology, material sciences
and other areas of mutual interest.
It is a matter of satisfaction that our bilateral trade doubled itself
in 2004 compared to what it was two years before and today reflects
a healthy figure of about $700 million. I believe that we expect to
reach one billion dollars by 2006. There are many opportunities for
co-operation between the two nations, which has the potential to enhance
the trade and business to minimum $5 billion by 2010. I am confident,
Speech at the Banquet hosted by the President of Ukraine, H.E. Mr. Viktor
Yushchenko, 2nd June 2005
666 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
given the interest and commitments that exist in both countries, that
we will meet this target. We also need to focus on promoting investments
and reducing trade barriers. Many Indian companies are present in
At the same time Ukrainian entrepreneurs could look for
opportunities for trade and investment in India. India has emerged as
a competitive provider of goods and services to the world economy.
As such it may make sound business sense for Ukraine to source, for
example, pharmaceuticals or information technology services from
India. Our common efforts should contribute to taking our economic
and commercial relations to higher levels.
We are living in a globalized world and there is a healthy growth
in our interdependence. There are critics of this process who are worried
by the impact of globalization on the poor. We are responsible members
of the world community, and democracies have the responsibility of
ensuring that globalization of the world economy takes place in an
equitable manner and that right of the weak and poor are not trampled.
Our march towards the future has to be consistent with the principles
of equity and democracy.
In the above context, changes are needed in the world's multilateral
institutional architecture. The UN is an august and widely respected
body which enjoys the trust and faith of our two countries. However,
it does not fully reflect the realities in today's fast changing world.
One of my Government's foreign policy priorities is to seek greater
democratization of the UN and its Security Council.
I have been moved by the respect and admiration for and depth
of knowledge of Indian culture and art shown by the Ukrainian people.
Cultural contacts between our two great nations will help strengthen
bilateral ties and the foundation of friendship at the people to people
level. Consciousness about Indian spiritual and cultural traditions also
permeates in the thinking of the greatest sons of Ukraine. In this context,
Ivan Franko's Hymn to Buddha so eloquently captures the quintessence
of Indian spiritual thought and at the same time the ephemeral nature
INDIA AND THE WORLD 667
"All hail, Buddha, to thee!
The light of our dark life!
Thou miracle, thou world
Of peace in furious strife!
The allurement of a throne,
The powers of love and hate."
May I now request all the distinguished guests to join me in
to the personal good health and happiness of His Excellency
Mr. Viktor Yushchenko, President of Ukraine and Madam
to the well-being and prosperity of the people of Ukraine;
to the friendship between India and Ukraine.
India-Africa - For Focussed Missions
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the India-Africa Project
Partnership 2005 "Expanding Horizons'1 organized by Confederation
of Indian Industries (CII) and EXIM Bank. My greetings to the
organizers, Hon'ble Ministers, Principal Advisors, Bankers, Business
Captains, representatives of Chambers of Commerce and Industries
and Government representatives participating in this Conclave.
Particularly, I would like to greet the delegates of 31 African countries
who are participating in this Conclave. I understand that the first
Conclave resulted in discussions on 178 projects valued at US $ 6
billion for further partnership and also signing of 12 MoUs. In this
Conclave you have discussed specific participation of Indian business
leaders in African projects. You have also had interaction with
institutions for long term involvement in capacity building. I am
sure that these interactions will lead to new partnership between Indian
industry leaders and African industry leaders and result in the
establishment of new enterprises in Africa and India based on the
core competence of both the countries.
1 am happy to note that as part of New Partnership for Africa
Development and TEAM-9 projects valued at $360 million have been
approved and letters of credit opened. Also 15,000 students from
different parts of Africa study in India and 1000 officials from Sub -
Saharan Africa receive training annually in India under 1TEC
I studied the number and profile of participants of both India
and Africa who attended the first Conclave held in March 2005 and
attending the second Conclave being held now. It is really a high
level participation. In addition CII and the EXIM bank have provided
certain inputs for the Conclaves. In spite of that I consider there is a
large scope for improvement in the quality of output which has resulted
Address at the Valedictory Function of the Conclave on India-Africa Project Partnership
2005 "Expanding Horizons", New Delhi, 8 November 2005
INDIA AND THE WORLD 669
from these two Conferences. That would need active participation
from both the Governments, focussed programme definition by industry
captains and also creation of clearance mechanisms for faster decision
process by both the countries.
During the last two years I had an opportunity to visit African
countries such as Sudan, Tanzania, Tanzania-Zanzibar and South Africa.
Also I had an opportunity to address the Pan African Parliament on
16 Sept 2004, at Johannesburg, South Africa which was attended by
Heads of 53 member countries of the African unit. There I announced
the willingness of Government of India to provide seamless and
integrated satellite, fibre optics and wireless network connecting 53
African countries. This will provide three connectivities: (i) Heads
of the State Network for e-governance (ii) Tele-education network
for higher education, skill enhancement and capacity building and
(iii) Tele-medicine for providing health care and super specialty medi
care. This programme will be funded by India. This network will be
in position by early 2007.
Now, I would like to give the sequence of events which took
place before final signing of the MoU between India and African
Union for implementation of Pan-African e-network project. As soon
as the project was announced a technical committee was appointed
by Prime Minister's Office (PMO) to generate the project report. The
derivation of the project report took four months and needed six meetings
of the technical experts drawn from Department of Space, Rashtrapati
Bhavan, Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) and Telecommunications
Consultants India Limited (TCIL). MEA had also interacted with African
Union (AU) and member countries in this period. After the submission
of the project report, PMO reviewed the project two times. Then PMO
directed MEA to submit the project to AU. MEA organized a
presentation of the project report by a high level team to Chairman
and members of the AU. AU also constituted a Technical Review
Committee consisting of members drawn from AU and International
organizations. The final presentation was made by the Indian team
to the Technical Review Committee which observed that this proposal
is in line with the missions and objectives of the African Union and
provides tremendous potential for achieving the MDG (Millennium
Development Goals) through the use of innovative ICT. Meanwhile
670 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
I made a presentation of the whole project to the 28 Ambassadors of
Pan African countries stationed in Delhi at Rashtrapati Bhavan. They
also visited ISRO and saw the operational tele-medicine facilities.
After this event MoU between AU and India has been signed on 27th
October 2005. It can be seen with the persistent efforts of PMO, ME A
and AU, a comprehensive robustly reviewed, mutually agreed project
proposal for implementation of the state-of-the-art Pan African e-
network has been evolved within a year, due to the focussed participation
of all the stakeholders in the system.
I am giving this example to illustrate how with focussed attention
a Government system has been able to perform in a time bound manner.
In the case of private sector enteiprises who have much more autonomy
of operation, they should definitely be able to achieve higher level of
results if they follow a focussed approach to project conceptualisation,
formulation and implementation. CII and EXIM bank should study
the specific problem faced by the business leaders and carve out a
definitive problem solving session with various constituents of the
decision making machinery. Here I would like to mention that AU
and India can conduct a survey and short list a few consultants both
in India and Africa for the preparation of robust project reports, which
will meet the needs of the policies and procedures, enunciated by
both the Governments from time to time.
As all of you will agree with me India and Africa are natural
allies. We have many things in common and we have a common
civilizational heritage. We have a historical link right from when
Mahatma Gandhi sowed the seeds of Ahimsa dharma in South Africa.
Also Africa has great leaders of international status like Mwalimu Nyerere,
Nelson Mandela and Martin Luther King. Now India is in the process
of transforming itself into a developed nation by the year 2020. Hence
I would like to present our national challenges and plans. I am sure that
this may be relevant to many of the countries in the AU.
Our nation is going through a major challenge of uplifting of
260 million people who are below the poverty line and also to give
oeiu i life tor many millions who are on the border line of poverty or
just above the poverty line. They need a decent habitat, they need
INDIA AND THE WORLD 671
work with reasonable income, they need food, they need speedy access
to health care, and they need education and finally they need a good
life and hope for a better future. Our GDP is growing at more than
7% per annum on an average, whereas, the economists suggest that
to uplift the people from below the poverty line, our economy has to
grow at the rate of 10% per annum consistently, for over a decade.
To meet the need of one billion people, we have the mission of
transforming India into a developed nation. We have identified five
areas where India has a core competence for integrated action: (1)
Agriculture and food processing, (2) Reliable and Quality Electric
power, Surface transport and Infrastructure for all parts of the country,
(3) Education and Health care, (4) Information and Communication
Technology, and (5) Strategic sectors. These five areas are closely
inter-related and if properly implemented, will lead to food, economic
and national security of our country.
Emphasis should be on full utilization of natural and human
resources of the nation to meet the demands of the modern society.
We should also remember that about 50% of our population is young
people with aspirations for better living. Value addition in agriculture,
manufacturing and service sectors, building the national core
competence and technologies will lead to additional high income
employment potential. The engines for growth will be accelerated by
launching of the five national missions, viz. water, energy, education
and skills, infrastructure and employment generation. The totality of
these five missions will enable achievement of 10% GDP growth rate
per annum. It is possible to do so with ecological and economic
sustainability. It is not the mission of governments. It is a collective
effort of big and small businesses, science and technology and academic
institutions, foreign investors, and many others who have confidence
With these aspects in view, we have already laid down the road
map. The priority for the government is to convert the road map into
various missions. It is to be done in a decentralized manner allowing
a greater role for private enterprise and local initiatives. While converting
the vision into different missions we seem to have many thoughts
672 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
and variety of routes to reach the goal. This is where there is a need
to have a coherent thinking among all the members of the society,
including the legal and law and other agencies. All of us have to
think that the nation is greater than an individual or an organization.
All of us should believe that "we can do it". The key question before
us is: How to create such an enabling environment?
Let me discuss some of the national missions that India is giving
thrust to for achieving sustainable economic development for all the
regions of the nation. I am sharing these missions with the members
of this Conclave, so that you may like to replicate this model in your
countries. First I would like to talk about agriculture and agro food
India is now producing about 200 million tonnes of food grains,
as a result of the first green revolution piloted by the political leadership
of Shri. C. Subramaniam, the scientific leadership of Dr. M.S.
Swaminathan and willing farmers. India has now embarked on Second
Green Revolution which will enable increase in productivity and
diversification of the agricultural sector. The second green revolution
will have the farmers in focus, farming technology as the friend, food
processing and marketing as partners and the consumers as customers.
From now on to 2020, India will gradually increase the production to
around 400 million tonnes of grains. The increase in the production
will have to be done under the reduced availability of land from 170
million hectares to 100 million hectares with reduced water availability.
We should also learn to diversify to meet specific consumer preferences,
export markets and also in the interest of ecological balance. This is
to be achieved through information access to all stakeholders and not
with central controls or restriction of movements of agro products.
Now, I would like to discuss about PURA.
The number of PURA units for the whole country is estimated
io be 7000. This envisages integrated connectivities to bring prosperity
to rural India. These are - physical connectivity of the village clusters
through quality roads and transport; electronic connectivity through
tele-communication with high bandwidth fibre optic cables reaching
the rural areas from urban cities and through internet kiosks; and
INDIA AND THE WORLD 673
knowledge connectivity through education, vocational training for
farmers, artisans and craftsmen and entrepreneurship programmes.
These three connectivities will lead to economic connectivity through
starting of enterprises with the help of banks, micro credits and marketing
Each PURA cluster will connect about 20 villages depending
upon the region and population and will cost about Rs.100 crores
(~$20 million). After initial short-term employment during construction
etc., we have to plan for initiating actions for providing regular
employment and self-employment opportunities in nationally
competitive small enterprises in agro processing, manufacturing and
services sectors for about 3000 people. If the industrial/business parks
are marketed well, they can generate employment opportunities in
support sector for about 10,000 people in that cluster. This will provide
sustainable economy for the rural sector. In this national mission,
bankers can promote entrepreneurship in the rural areas. This will
lead to the removal of urban-rural divide. This experience can become
a model for other countries to follow.
Last year I had visited Periyar Maniammai College of Technology
for women and inaugurated a project called Periyar PURA (Providing
Urban amenities in Rural Areas) Complex. Over 65 villages near Vallam,
Thanjavur district of Tamilnadu, have been transformed as a PURA
cluster. This PURA complex has all the three connectivities - physical
connectivity, which has a circular road and interconnecting roads
covering major villages along with bus transport system, it provides
electronic connectivity through internet kiosks and knowledge
connectivity through its academic background - leading to economic
connectivity to the 65 villages.
The centre of activity emanates from the women engineering
college that provides the electronic and knowledge connectivity. Periyar
PURA has health care centres, primary to post-graduate level education
and vocational training centres. This has resulted in large scale
employment generation and creation of a number of entrepreneurs
with the active support of 850 self-help groups.
They have innovative water management schemes for irrigation
and providing potable water for all the village citizens. All 65 Periyar
674 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
PURA villages are having only rain fed irrigation. 200 acres of waste
land has been developed into cultivable land with innovative water
management schemes such as contour ponds and water sheds for storing
and irrigating the fields. All the villagers are busy in either cultivation,
planting Jatropha, herbal and medicinal plants, power generation using
bio-mass, food processing and above all running marketing centres.
Due to shortage of rainfall in that locality, farmers were suffering
due to scarcity of water not only for agriculture but also for drinking
purposes. Keeping this in mind, Periyar PURA developed six percolation
ponds and five check dams to harness the rain water amounting to
2.73 lakh cubic metre per year. This water is supporting the irrigation
of 300 acres of land through recharging their open wells and bore
wells. It also supplies drinking water to the people. Periyar PURA
has also developed alternate practices such as Contour lands, check
dams across natural streams for water conservation and developed a
model for irrigation for conservation of water. More than 5000 farmers
are benefiting from this programme. This example will be useful for
water management in PURA complexes. Recently Periyar PURA
has brought a number of employment oriented schemes to the Tsunami
affected Nagapattinam villages and trained the Self-Help Groups on
tiles making, paper manufacturing, alternative building blocks
manufacturing and a number of commonly used items required in the
rural and urban markets. This single women engineering college has
empowered the villagers through the skills oriented training, provision
of finance and provision of market connectivity for their produce.
Recently, I visited a place called Loni in Maharashtra where a
participative model of integrated rural development has come up among
44 villages with a population of 80,000. The architect of this model
Shri Bala Saheb Vikhe Patil, MP of Maharashtra has a vision of
improving the productivity of the rural people through improved quality
of life with health care, education and employment. The concept is
people-centric development for social transformation. The thrust area
of development has been on comprehensive medicare particularly for
women and children, need-based health education and e-connectivity
to the farmers. The complex has created 27 educational and vocational
institutions consisting of schools, colleges, polytechnic and ITI including
INDIA AND THE WORLD 675
medical and engineering colleges. They have created a sugar factory,
bio-grass plants, chemical plants and power projects. They have a
large number of self-help groups for providing low interest loan for
the weaker sections in the society. Due to the co-operative effort of
the people, literacy in these villages has gone up from 63% to 83%,
birth rate has come down 2.3% to 2%, infant mortality rate has decreased
to 35 per 1000 from 70 per 1000 and the standard of living of the
people has gone up by over 20% compared to other village clusters in
Government has decided to permit mixing of 10% bio-fuel with
diesel. This has opened up new opportunities for employment and
wealth generation. We have nearly 63 million hectares of wasteland
available in the country, out of which 33 million hectares of wasteland
has been allotted for tree plantation. Certain multi-purpose trees such
as Jatropha can grow well in wasteland with very little input. Once
grown the crop has fifty years of life. Fruiting can take place in this
plant in less than two years.
It yields oil seeds up to five tonnes per hectare per year and
produces two tonnes of bio-diesel. Presently, the cost of bio-diesel
through the plant is approximately Rs. 17 to Rs. 19 per litre which
can be substantially reduced through choice of right size of the plant
and using high yield variety plantation. Bio-diesel plants grown in
11 million hectares of land can yield a revenue of approximately Rs.
20,000 crore a year and provide employment to over 12 million people
both for plantation and running of the extraction plants. This is a
sustainable development process leading to large scale employment
of rural manpower. Also, it will reduce the foreign exchange outflow
paid for importing crude oil, the cost of which is continuously rising
in the international market Moreover, use of bio-fuel is C02 emission-
free. This oil can also he used for soap and candle industries. De
oiled cake is a raw material for composting. Also Jatropha plantation
provides a good environment for honey production. We should absorb
best of the technologies available worldwide and start commercial
operation soon. 1 would request the banking community assembled
here to take the initiative, generate detailed project report in collaboration
676 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
with technical agencies on this project and promote entrepreneurs
with financial support from the banks in rural areas who can undertake
the plantation and commissioning of extraction plant leading to
production of cost-effective bio-fuel. I am sure the bio-fuel plants
can grow in many parts of Africa. Can there be a better project than
this for coherent development of our rural sector in our countries?
It is reported that in India the number of HIV infected people is
on the increase. It is critical that the transmission of HIV infection is
prevented. An effective vaccine that can prevent this disease will be
a cost effective tool for control of infectious diseases. There are three
sub-types of viruses classified as A, B and C. I understand that Indian
population is largely affected by sub-type C virus.
There are two candidate vaccines presently considered for use
against sub-type C virus in our country. In view of the urgency of
finding a cost-effective vaccine, the expert group reviewed the vaccine
candidate for HIV sub-type C in the pipeline. Adeno-Associated Virus
(AAV) based vaccine with HIV-1 sub-type C (African strain) developed
by Targetted Genetics Corp, USA was found to be in advanced stage
of test in different parts of the world. This HIV vaccine (tgAAC09) is
now undergoing Phase-I trial for safety and immunogenicity assessment
in healthy HIV uninfected volunteers at National AIDS Research
The Indian vaccine has been developed by scientists from National
Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases in collaboration with National
Aids Research Institute, Pune and Therion Biologies, USA. This is a
recombinant vaccine containing six genes from HIV 1-C strain. This
vaccine was developed from the virus isolated from National Aids
Research Institute, Pune. This will go into Phase-I trial in healthy
uninfected adults at Tuberculosis Research Centre, Chennai during
this year. Both these programmes are being progressed as a joint venture
between ICMR, National Aids Control Organisation (NACO) and
International Aids Vaccine Initiative. In addition to these two vaccines
a DNA based vaccine and SFV vaccine are also under development.
Time has now arrived to take up this development in a mission
mode so that an effective vaccine will be available for our countries
INDIA AND THE WORLD 677
within the next two years. Simultaneously, I would suggest that the
medical community must start working on the development of anti
vaccines for sub-types A and B also. India and Africa can definitely
work together in this programme.
The electronic connectivity for one billion people must transform
into a network and provide a seamless access between knowledge
creator, converter of knowledgeable products and the knowledge
consumers. This can be achieved through the creation of knowledge
grid, health grid, governance grid and PURA grid.
To maximize the synergy between the grids, leading to
maximization of GDP and productivity, there is a need for inter-grid
connectivities, which may be called as societal grid. Knowledge sharing,
knowledge utilization and knowledge re-use is very vital by all
constituents of the society for promoting non-linear growth. Societal
1. Knowledge Grid - Inter connecting universities with socio
economic institutions, industries and R&D organizations.
2. Health Care Grid - Inter-connecting the Health Care
institutions of Government, Corporate and Super specialty
hospitals. Research institutions, educational institutions and
ultimately, Pharma R&D institutions.
3. E-Governance Grid - Inter-connecting the Central
Government and State Governments and District and Block
level offices for G2G and G2C connectivity.
4. PURA Knowledge Grid - Connecting the PURA nodal
centres with the village knowledge centres and domain service
providers. Since this is the backbone for rural development,
all other Grids will infuse the knowledge into this Grid for
sustainable development, health care and good governance.
For example, five of the Periyar PURA villages are now
connected using Wi-MAX connectivity, which will act as
an inter-connected delivery mechanism for tele-education
tele-medicine and e-Governance services apart from
678 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
individual access by the people, within and between the
Village Knowledge Centres through the PURA Grid.
In order to make the country the most advanced knowledge society,
we should aim at making the bandwidth available without hindrance
and at no cost. Making the bandwidth available is like the Government
laying the roads. Movement of materials through these roads creates
wealth in the industrial economy and the government recovers more
than the investment on the roads by way of taxes and enhanced prosperity
of its people. In the modern digital economy driven by knowledge
products, bits and bytes traverse the network and create wealth and
this will recover the cost of investments in the bandwidth. Cost effective
creation of the four Grids and inter connectivity between Grids is the
profound platform for collaborative research, development and
I have shared with you certain thoughts on development and
also certain key accomplishments, which has been realized so far.
There is substantial scope for co-operation between Africa and India,
which can provide a better quality of life for the people of both nations.
Both the countries have a large bio-diversity, substantial amount of
natural resources and hard working human resources. Also, Africa
and India are aspiring to become developed countries. What we need
is to identify the core competence of each one of us and match the
core competence with the economic and societal needs of a particular
nation. The connectivity is the key for marching towards our goal of
development in a faster pace than what we have been doing so far.
Knowledge creation, knowledge sharing and knowledge dissemination
are the vital components for our growth. I am sure that the future
Conclaves will provide focussed opportunity for both the countries
to move towards the development goals in a coherent manner.
My best wishes to the members of this Conclave in their mission
of expanding the partnership horizons of India and Africa for their

Leadership for High Altitude Battle
^ODAY I HAVE VISITED Kumar, and the Siachen Battle School
in Base Camp-1. When I was flying from Thoise to Kumar and
back, I was witnessing the challenge of snowy terrain with fast winds.
Now I am with you. Your Brigade has a tremendous responsibility
for defending the Siachen Sector, in varied seasons under heavy snow
fall and against incessant gun firings some times. Now I know the
guns are silent. The 75 kms long, 2 to 4 kms wide Siachen glacier
is of extreme geo-strategic importance where our Indira Pol meets
POK and Aksai Chin. Many battles have been fought during the last
20 years to establish our supremacy. It is a war of deeds. You have
defended it with valour and blood. Your will power and love for the
nation are the most powerful battle winning weapons. A strong mind
and physique is an asset for national security and provides leadership
to high altitude battle.
Nation realizes that you are encountering not one adversary but
two. One across the border and the other the inhospitable nature. We
recognize that you are fighting a battle at the highest altitude in the
world. It is the duty of the nation to ensure your welfare and happiness
and the happiness of your families at all times. You must remember
that when 102 Brigade is defending Siachen sector you are not only
defending India's territorial integrity and water resources but you are
also partnering in and fueling the economic development mission of
the nation which will make our children live in a happy, prosperous
I know that the Indian armed forces are one of best in the world,
perhaps the best. Not only am I saying this, the whole international
community speaks about this. This is amply demonstrated by your brave
performance during the four wars in 1948, 1965, 1971 and 1999. You
have also participated in many international and UN peace-keeping
Address at BASE CAMP, Siachen Glacier, Siachen Sector, 2 April 2004
682 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
missions and performed extremely well. We are proud of your
The troops in Siachen sector have to be always alert with very fast
reaction time. But I can assure you that the nation is fully conscious of
its responsibility in enhancing troops survivability, sustainability,
efficiency and motivation with cheers. Nation has a comprehensive
security plan. We are also having diplomatic approach for peace; some
positive and encouraging signs are visible along the western and northern
borders. There is a sustained effort to modernize all the three wings of
the armed forces and equip them with the latest and the state-of-the-art
technologies with sufficient resources allotted.
I am sure this brigade has all the necessary winter clothing, food
with sufficient calories, modem reconnaissance equipments and attack
weaponry for mountain warfare. From base camp you have to walk for
a few days to reach your post. At that time apart from winter clothing
you should use thermally heated shoes and should carry a map indicating
possible avalanche prone areas and crevasse mapping using Ground
Penetration Radar, which is likely to be available very soon. I would
recommend our troops to get trained in the usage of handheld GPS,
while moving from base camp to post and post-to-post and patrolling.
When I was Scientific Advisor to Raksha Mantri, after visiting Siachen
in April 1998, I gave priority to five defence labs to conduct R&D to
provide specific operational support to Siachen Sector. Now, I am being
assured, that the fruits of those R&D efforts results are coming in. Fresh
vegetables and milk for the Jawans, lighter weapons, lighter uniform
and efficient reconnaissance equipment have become a reality today
for our Jawans. I would like to see that the Partapur detachment of
Field Research Laboratory (FRL) supplies certain types of vegetables
and fresh milk all through the year. This can also be augmented by the
main FRL through a well-organized movement plan between Leh and
I understand that now it is possible with Ground Penetration Radars
fitted on the helicopter/aircraft, one can map the crevasses with good
accuracy. Definitely this GPR system in combination with GPS will be
made available to the 102 Brigade. During patrolling, I understand that
the soldier has to carry his payload requirements such as food, clothing,
water, weapons and ammunition, reconnaissance equipment sufficient
for seven days at a stretch. I would like the R&D units to bring down
the payload weight of the soldier on patrolling by 50% keeping the
calorific value, nutrition, weather protection and fighting ability for
enhancing his endurance and survivability.
I have visited command hospital at Chandigarh, where I had the
opportunity of interacting with the scientists, Army Medical Corps
doctors exploring the therapeutic applications of Aloevera cream along
with allopathic remedies for the medical management of cold injuries.
I was happy to see the patients who have been benefited by this holistic
By the deployment of large volume of troops, there is a possibility
of environmental concerns regarding its degradation. Damage to Siachen
glacier is the damage to water reservoir of the region. It is essential for
all of us to maintain and preserve the glacier in its virgin form. Scientists
have successfully developed the bio-digesters by identifying suitable
microorganisms, which can handle the human waste even at these
extreme temperatures. The greening of Ladakh region has also been
another successful endeavor of the scientists and the soldiers along with
the farmers. We should continue these efforts.
Survival of the Siachen glacier is very important for the nation
since it is our water reservoir. I would like the Army to take this up as
a mission and keep the glacier ecologically safe, as Army has always
done in various units and installations in different sectors for
enhancement of ecology. Any deterioration of the glacier will be
detrimental to our water resource and ecology.
I would like to share with you a philosophic thought, in this divine
Himalayan ambience. I believe God creates every living being with a
mission and specific purpose. You are fortunate to have been blessed
to be in a position to perform a noble mission of defending the nation as
soldiers. When I see you, you all look very smart, you look combat
ready and through gracious smile in your faces you look winning.
Maintaining peace in Siachen sector is and will be due to your valour
and strength. Your defense capability will pave the way for the nation's
progress. Maintaining peace in our borders has a tremendous impact in
progressing the economic development of the nation at a faster pace.
Indian Air Force : Partner in
T AM INDEED very happy to be with you, Airmen, Warrant officers
and Officers at Pathankot Air force station. I would like to congratulate
you for the excellent work that you are doing for ensuring the security
of the Nation. I found that in this theatre of operation (J&K and Ladakh),
there is a close coordination between the Army and the Air Force.
This system of integrated functioning of the various arms of the services
brings the force multiplier effect to our armed forces. Western Air
command is a very important command, which is spread in the whole
of J&K and Ladakh. You have many types of aircraft with MiG series
as the primary work force.
I visited Thoise airbase on 2 April 2004.1 was briefed about the
Air force contribution to Operation Meghdoot. During my short stay
at this air force station, I visited the war memorial and paid homage
to many dedicated air force personnel who had laid down their lives
while defending the integrity of the Nation. They have left a great
tradition of sacrifice for all of us to follow . Also I went to the school
and interacted with bright young children who are bubbling with
enthusiasm and energy. Finally before reaching here, I witnessed the
airfield strike and air defence demonstration of this unit, which gives
me an insight into the precision strike capabilities of Pathankot Air
I am sure, the fighter aircraft deployment at this Air Force base
with the modem weaponry and electronic warfare systems will bring
forth new dimensions in the modem air warfare. Also the reconnaissance
aircraft have to be mounted with Ground Penetration Radars and
Synthetic Aperture Radars for enabling detection of crevasses and
enabling photography penetrating the clouds for the safe movement of
Jawans on patrol, particularly when you give support to forward troops.
Address at the Air Force Station, Pathankot, 3 May 2004
High altitude UAV systems need to be added with appropriate sensors
for reconnaissance operations. For enhancing air defense capability there
is a need to induct Akash system at an early date. The induction of
Airborne Warning and Control Systems would enhance your
surveillance capabilities manifold. Up-to-date intelligence in the battle
field is an important input in our strategic planning. Today, semi-
autonomous palm sized aircraft for surveillance is a reality. I am
sure with your dedication and foresight, you will soon work with the
nation to obtain these capabilities. Even biological vehicles fitted with
cameras and trained for sustained long endurance flights can be used
for surveillance. These surveillance systems along with agile fighters,
attack helicopters and advanced surface-to-air-missile systems, will
provide force multiplication in various dimensions to improve the total
Future warfare is an integrated warfare of Army, Air Force and
Navy. This has come out very clearly during the Kargil operations.
Timely deployment of Air Force was one of the key reasons for early
decisive success in that operation. Many of you would have participated
in that operation. I congratulate the Air Force team for the remarkable
combat performance during the Kargil Operations. Communication and
common data interchange framework are the backbone of Integrated
warfare. Time has come for the training to include joint operations in a
seamless way. I am sure you are providing similar contribution to the
army in this sector with the fighters, attack helicopters and SAMs.
When I see Corporals, Sergeants, Warrant Officers and other
officers, I am reminded of my early career in defence. While I was
posted at Aircraft Armament Testing Unit, Kanpur, in 19581 had worked
with many of them and seen their dedication, commitment and
specialization in work. Later, when I was Scientific Advisor to Raksha
Mantri, I was the Chairman of the Committee on Fighter Aircraft
Accidents (COFAA). As a part of this committee's work, myself and
other members of the committee had visited almost all the Air Force
stations in the country. The committee had made about ninety
recommendations for implementation by various agencies. 1 am happy
to know that almost all the recommendations including training have
been accepted and many of them have been implemented. Also the
process of AJT acquisition has commenced. But whatever be the state
686 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
of the art of the equipment, you are the integral part of the Air Force
who can make sure that the fleet is always up and trouble free. During
the deliberations of COFAA (Committee on Fighter Aircraft Accidents),
1 happened to see the log books of many MiG aircrafts having the
signature of master warrant officers, sergeants and corporals reporting
the aircraft status after every flight. If all of you and other concerned
agencies make it a habit of attending and rectifying the problem at the
right time our air force will definitely have the unique record of nearly
When I see you all in your uniform, you look very smart, you look
combat ready and you look confident to face any situation and win. I
am fully aware of the difficult environment in which you have been
operating and carrying out your duties meticulously to support the army
operations in this sector. It is essential to continuously modernize the
equipment and add force multipliers to enhance the operational
performance and improve flight safety.
It is recognized that this Air Force base has taken active part during
1948 and 1971 wars. You have also made excellent contribution during
the Operation Safed Sagar and Operation PARAKRAM. The squadron
aircraft are flown and maintained with passion and professionalism.
You maintained the fleet at an instant state of readiness since you have
been nominated as the core squadron of Western Air Command. In
addition to your air defence duties you also undertake counter surface
force operation in the hills. I was told that the unit is currently focused
on sharpening the night fighting capabilities bestowed on you by cost
effective night vision suite. In addition to providing support to Indian
army personnel, your unit has also participated in several UN
Twenty first century soldier will encounter a highly technology
intensive battlefield, like high demand on agility, fast and accurate
cognitive processing ability, high mobility, quick reaction and stable
emotional profile. The selection process should define such a futuristic
combatant personality and evolve an appropriate system to select
personnel for the Air Force and upgradation of existing teams. The
placement of soldiers in the appropriate task will require skillful aptitude
testing. Food during combat needs to be lightweight with high-energy
concentration and ability to sustain vigilance and enhanced cognitive
responses. Nutraceuticals and food supplements can be used as mood
enhancers for improving sustained operational efficiency. Smart clothing
with ability to adjust to the environment fitted with GPS, micro
computer, vital physiological function sign monitoring, excellent
communication system, NBC protective when needed, and powered by
micro-fuel cell, light weight bullet proof jackets using new composites
materials need to be developed. The survivability, sustainability,
efficiency and lethality of the airmen and soldiers as a system need to
be ensured for the victory in a future war, which will require joint
I am confident that you will continue the tradition of your success
and valour in all your future operations. The entire nation is with you
and leads you to modernize and force multiply all your aerial platforms
and ground support systems, so that you will excel in the aerial warfare.
Indian Air Force is indeed the angels for our ground troops. I thank you
for keeping a vigil with sleepless nights so that the Nation can go to
sleep every day in peace.
Improving the Health and Efficiency
J AM DELIGHTED to participate in the inauguration of 53rd Armed
A Forces Medical Research Conference organized by the Armed Forces
Medical Services. I greet the specialist doctors, scientists, technologists,
pharmacologists, medical support personnel and distinguished guests
participating in this conference.
I have been closely involved in the collaborative research activities
between the life science research scientists of DRDO and armed forces
research team. During the last two decades this team has contributed
in improving the health and operational efficiency of the soldiers.
During the next two decades, the crucial development will take place
in science and technology, particularly in life science area. Fortunately
DRDO's Life Sciences Research Board has given due importance to
various present and future requirements of the armed forces. In today's
discussion both the Armed Forces Medical Research Committee and
Life Sciences Research Board of DRDO are to consider certain priority
areas and focus their developments. The results should be useful and
beneficial for our soldiers.
Health care of Armed forces is quite complex in war time and
also in peacetime. War time the type of injuries mostly head oriented
and also below the hip, the typical problem immediately would be
attended are protecting the eye, brain damage and bone repair. Attending
the cardio vascular system in right time. In peace time attending the
orthopeadic reconstruction, retina replacements and liver damage. Right
type of blood availability and timely blood transfusion and revival.
In long term transplantation of liver, eye, plastic surgery.
Keeping this in mind, I would like to talk to you on 'Let my
Brain Remove the Pain'.
Address during the inauguration of 53rd Armed Forces Medical Research Conference
(AFMC), Pune, 1 February 2005
As per one of the studies, only 8% of the world population has
access to heart surgery delivery systems. Out of the 6.5 lakh surgeries
taking place in a year, 4.5 lakhs are performed in USA alone, only 2
lakhs are performed in the rest of the world. In India, fifty to sixty
thousand operations are performed every year, whereas possibly 2.5
million people may need heart operations in India. Even though armed
forces personnel are less susceptible for cardio vascular ailments, but
injuries in the heart regions due to war time operations and also due
to reduced physical activity in the peace stations the incidence of
cardio vascular diseases are noticeable. Another observation is that
the occurrence of coronary artery diseases in India is taking place
between the age group of 35 and 55, whereas in the western world, it
generally occurs after 55 or 60. The main reason for this in India is
attributed to the urban life style and intake of rich food having high
cholesterol. It is also found that the occurrence of cardiovascular cases
is 4% in rural area as against the 10% found in big cities in India.
Whereas the world statistics says that the incidence is only 3 to 4%.
The genetic predisposition of Indian population for cardio vascular
diseases needs to be given special attention. A research is essential
for establishing the reasons for occurrence of heart ailments among
Indians at a young age and also the reduced occurrence of the disease
in rural areas. The results of the study will assist in national planning
for combating the heart ailment.
Many Indian laboratories and hospitals are working in Research
and Development of Stem Cell production. Advancement in stem cell
research in the country has brought confidence among expert doctors
to take up its clinical application in heart, eye, pancreas, liver, neural,
kidney diseases and spinal injury.
Newer knowledge emerging out of research on stem cells from
abroad and India has to be taken note of and studied. Drawing of tens
of thousands of stem cell - immature cells that are capable of
transforming themselves into almost any kind of tissues from the
suffering patients and inject them into the heart to stimulate heart
repair. In one case, it is reported that the pumping efficiency has
increased from 25% to 40% over a period of four months. In 2004,
690 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
successful stem cell procedures that resulted in measurable boost in
blood pumping capacity have increased substantially in many countries
across the globe. This holds a big promise for effective heart repair
During my visit to various laboratories, I happened to see the
beginning of stem cell research for different purposes including brain
research. I would like to share with you an important stem cell research
application in the field of cardiology. When I met Dr. P. Venugopal,
Director, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) a famous
cardiovascular and thoracic surgeon, he told me about his experiences.
He said in one of the cardiac diseases, where conventional medical
and surgical treatment were ineffective because of the affliction of
the heart muscle, use of autologous bone marrow stem cells implantation
into the diseased heart muscles had been applied in order to improve
the function of heart muscle. This kind of application of this procedure
is the latest and very few cases have been done in the world, such an
application has been done for the first time in India. This is expected
to open new frontiers in the treatment of patients for regeneration of
heart muscles, thereby giving new hope for the patients suffering from
terminal stage heart disease.
The New Scientist (dated 25th September 2004) has reported
another remarkable recovery of a heart patient at the John Wolfgang
Goethe University at Frankfurt. Of course for the first time, I have
come across a warning, stating that risk is very high. Against stem
cell solution for every aspect of human disease, it is reported that
large amount of animal tests is needed before applying it on humans.
The recent identification and characterization of progenitors with
stem cell properties has opened new avenues that may be useful for
treating functional impairments caused by the death of specific cell
population. Stromal and neuronal degeneration are the causes of
debilitating visual impairment associated with many ocular diseases,
such as degenerative diseases of cornea, retinitis pigmentosa (RP),
age related macular degeneration (AMD) and glaucoma. The stem
cells may help restore vision in patient who has these diseases, by
repopulating or rescuing the damaged ocular surface cells or retinal
cells from further degeneration.
The stem cell team of LV Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad
has administered stem cells in the affected region of the eye for over
200 patients and all of them are performing very well. Apart from
India, patients have come from Bangladesh and Nepal. The research
in this frontier area is facilitated by quality research publications.
On 4th January 2005 during the Indian Science Congress, I had
a discussion with the researchers and clinical physicians who are working
in Stem cell area. They are working in different areas of stem cell,
such as Cancer treatment, ophthalmology, spinal cord, cardiology etc.
Details of some of the success stories and experience were shared.
Dr. Bhan, Secretary, DBT and Dr. Ganguly, DG-ICMR is working
together in promoting stem cell research. They are evolving a road
map for stem cell research through three areas such as adult stem
cells, umbilical cord stem cells, and embryonic stem cells. A focus
has been given to stem cell research so that a mission mode operation
can soon commence. I was happy to note that the clinicians are driving
the research; this will enable easy technology transfer and fast diffusion
of technology. I understand that the Armed Forces have already started
work in stem cell areas in two of their institutes and have created
infrastructure both for research and clinical operation. I would suggest
the members of Armed Forces Medical Research Committee to
participate in the National Stem Cell Research and Application
Indian population is highly susceptible for coronary heart diseases
that too at a relatively young age irrespective of where they live. As
you are aware, Gene Chip arrays have tremendous potential to reach
goals from identifying genetic variations associated with heart disease
for discovering new drug targets.
Recently, I was in Chennai at Dr. Cherian's Medical Centre.
It is known as, International Centre for Biomedical Sciences
and Technology (Research & Applications). There I interacted
with Dr. Emmanuel, who is working in the area of Gene Chip. He
says the Gene Chip can be used for finding the existence of genetic
diseases including coronary artery diseases in the baby during a certain
692 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
stage of pregnancy itself. The Armed Forces Medical Services can
consider incorporation of the gene chip mandatory test during the
prenatal screening which I am told is regularly being done for all
As many as 50 different mutated genes are identified as responsible
for heart problems in Indian population. If a person is not having any
of these harmful mutated genes, then he may not suffer from heart
ailments. The Gene Chip is one which on contacting with the blood,
immediately identifies the mutated genes in the person. Based on
this information, proper guidance can be given to the patients and
parents. The chip could also be modified to suggest to the patient's
system to develop those chemicals which in turn will help the patient
recover from the present situation.
It is reported that gene differences between humans and most
animals are very nominal. More than 90% of our DNA is similar.
This property is a boon to researchers since animal models can be
subsequently used for curing human diseases based on trial data. It
has also been found that Gene Chips can be used for early diagnosis
of tumors and their treatment. Integrating molecular biology,
cytogenetics and bio-chemistry, bio-chip technology is regarded as
one of the greatest inventions in the research of gene functions. It is
far superior to molecular biological technology in terms of speed and
accuracy. I would recommend the medical researchers assembled here
to work in this area for finding the application of Gene Chip as a
diagnostic tool and as a treatment regime for many diseases.
Recently I met Prof. Vijay K Varadan of Pennsylvania State
University, USA. He shared his experience on the possible line of
treatment for Parkinson's disease and Epilepsy. The primary symptoms
in Parkinson's Disease as you are all aware are tremor or trembling
in hands, arms, legs, jaw, and face, rigidity or stiffness of the limbs,
slowness of movement and impaired balance. Prof. Varadan has devised
a wireless system for monitoring and control of Parkinson's disease.
The system consists of an implantable DNA insert (CNT probes) in
the head region for generating a pulse to the nerve system; controlled
either by a modified pacemaker or smart hat having passive polymer
based gyro sensors, which are implanted in the tremor location. The
sensor gets the power from the Pacemaker and the Pacemaker then
reads the tremor motion to generate pulse in the implanted device in
the head to control the tremor. This appears to be a promising line of
treatment for such diseases. Prof. Varadan also has reported that a
few patients affected by Parkinson's disease had full recovery. Such
medical intervention is also being done by Jaslok Hospital in Mumbai
and AIIMS at New Delhi. Can the medical community explore the
possibility of using a combination of stem cell and gene chips as a
line of treatment for Parkinson?s disease or epilepsy. During military
operations it is possible that some of the soldiers get head injury affecting
the brain in many ways and they need advance treatment through
convergence of technologies like the trio of bio, nano and information
technologies. I would suggest Armed Forces Medical Specialists to
have collaborative programme with All India Institute of Medical
Sciences (AIIMS) and other medical institutions working in this area
for promoting rehabilitation treatment for our soldiers.
One of the important areas, where I would like the Armed Forces
Medical Community to concentrate is on the containment of HIV/
AIDS. Efforts are being made all in the West to develop not only the
retro-viral drugs for combating the disease but also to develop a vaccine
for the prevention of HIV/AIDS. Here again, countries like India would
have to fend for themselves because, I am told, that the AIDS virus
which is prevalent in our country is of a different strain from that
which affects the West and Africa. As such, our research institutes
and professionals would require developing their own drugs and vaccines
to combat these strains of AIDS/HIV virus. As far as India is concerned,
I am told that the anti vaccine for HIV/AIDS is in the advanced stage
of development and getting ready for clinical trials. This programme
needs highest priority from multi work-centres including armed forces
hospitals in a mission mode. We may need to explore developing a
vaccine which will have therapeutic application against a wide spectrum
of HIV strains prevalent among Indian population. I am happy to
know that the Armed Forces Medical Services has been sensitive and
proactive to this dreaded disease and have created their own surveillance
criteria as well as a very comprehensive information, education and
694 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
communication network. In addition, the Armed Forces I am told
have many firsts in the fight against HIV/AIDS and is the first organized
sector in the country to have introduced ART (anti-retro viral therapy)
for all the personnel and their families as well as 100% screening
during the antenatal checkup. This has resulted in the containment of
the virus among the troops and today the number of cases reported
annually is on the decline. In the anti HIV vaccine development and
the clinical trials, AFMRC needs to become a partner.
During military operations a number of people are disabled and
immobilized. Also, immobilization takes place due to adverse
environmental conditions. It is essential to carryout research on special
rehabilitation methods to provide near normal performance efficiency
to the soldiers, sailors and airmen affected by enemy action. Major
loss is of the limbs. In line with this, I have been informed that the
Armed Forces have an artificial limb centre established at Pune which
has done pioneering work to provide better, stronger, lighter and more
durable appliances for the soldiers and the citizens of the country. In
addition to this, the personnel posted at high altitude, counter insurgency
and other isolated areas experience psychological problems. We have
to design special debriefing techniques for personnel returning from
difficult areas so that we can assess the psychological conditions and
provide them counseling and other psychological support for enabling
them to lead a normal life in the society. This is an inter-disciplinary
area requiring active research by physiologists and psychologists. I
am told that AFMS has already developed a comprehensive capsule
for managing combat stress. This activity has to be intensified for
continuously improving the rehabilitation package for the soldiers.
The Human system is an example of a perfect design in the
biological evolution. It has been designed with high precision. The
mankind is attempting to reach the precision of human system in
mechanical system design and electrical system design. This may
become possible with the advancement in nano-science and technology.
With this approach the future in medical science will lead to health
repair instead of being healthcare. There will be more and more
replacement of damaged system and parts, both artificial and naturally
grown through the use of implanted stem cells. Some of the examples
are Cochlear implants for hearing impairment and televised signals
for eye impairment through vision cameras to reach near normal
enablement. Also, the medical science is advancing to target the
medicine with precision through bio-nano-robots which will treat the
patients and finally the robot will get digested. The medical research
community has to work in these frontier areas for improving the life
style of the mankind needing such reconditioning.
During military operations a number of casualties takes place,
much ahead we have to have a biological organ bank. We have to
adopt a system and work out a drill so that we can collect the healthy
organs from the casualties with speed and store it in a bank for use by
needy patients. Example bone marrow for high radiation treatments,
umbical chord stem cells for tissue regeneration. Such banks will
help to restore vision, transplant of liver, kidney for the cure of patients
in an effective way. AFMS may consider creation of such biological
organ bank and carryout research for long term storage. For example,
I understand that Wisconsin University has succeeded in finding a
new solution which can preserve the harvested liver for 24 hours instead
of the present 5 to 12 hours. Our researchers need to take note of this
development and work for increasing the preservation time of the
Our Armed Forces have a number of hospitals and healthcare
units spread in many parts of the country. They have specialists in
almost all areas of medical science. I understand some hospitals have
installed tele-medicine facilities. I would recommend creation of
network of all hospitals through tele-connectivity and conferencing
atleast once in a month, so that the clinical data pertaining to various
ailments and diseases, can be shared by all the hospitals and specialists.
In addition, it will be useful to have presentation of case studies by
different specialists when they find special type of ailments and provide
innovative treatment to the patients. This research committee can also
encourage service personnel to ask questions through the tele-medicine
systems to the panel of specialist?s doctors and find a solution to
their problems, particularly the health centres and mobile clinic centres
of armed forces which are located in the operational areas should be
tele-connected to share in real time. This will enable the patient to
696 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
have the benefit of advice from doctors with varied experience and
arrive at a treatment regime for complex cases. I understand the AFMS
have already networked the healthcare establishment in Northern
Command with Army Hospital Research and Referral in Delhi. This
facility can be extended to all the military hospitals in the country in
DRDO has over ten laboratories working in life sciences area.
They work in different areas such as nuclear medicine, thyroid, nutrition,
bio-medical systems, virology, agriculture, clothing and shelter for
high altitude and difficult areas. Although there is a good working
relationship at the institutional level what is needed is connectivity
between the working scientists, practicing doctors and the clients without
the organizational barrier. This intensified association will provide
an opportunity to have close interaction between researchers and
clinicians which is vital for the development of drugs and fast clinical
trials for application of drugs to provide better healthcare to the mankind.
DRDO has successfully developed an antigen based typhoid
detection kit, which can quickly diagonise with in about 5 min, the
typhoid organism, where as convetional kit takes 3 to 5 days, since it
is antibody titre based. This technology has been transferred to excyton
for upscaling and commercialization. Similarly, for cancer treatment
analog glucose (2-de-oxyde-glucose) developed by INMAS as radio
sensitizer has been transferred to Dr. Reddy's laboratories for production
and commercialization. Since the product patent policy implementation
is at our doorsteps, such indigenous efforts are mandatory to ensure
availability of affordable healthcare to our population.
Research requires persistent effort. One of the problems faced
by AFMS is the constant posting of doctors from one station to another
and one type of hospital to another. This, to a certain extent, comes
as a problem for maintaining the continuity in research. What is needed
is a system by which the doctors can work from any station any time
by having tele-education connectivity between all hospitals and work
centres for continuing medical education, training and research. The
complex operations taking place in different medical centres can be
broadcasted through tele-medicine link to the trainee doctors. This is
now possible with the availability of our own satellite for education
(EDUSAT) and broad band connectivity available till the block level
across the country. This facility must be made operational in mission
mode to overcome the problem arising out of periodic posting of medical
community. This facility will also enable better interaction between
the AFMS and corporate, private and government hospitals leading
to the enhancement of the scope of their association and contribution
to the medical science. In addition to the existing research programmes,
AFMRC in partnership with DRDO can consider undertaking a multi
disciplinary, multi-institutional mega programme for management of
infectious and water borne diseases. I am happy to inaugurate the
53rd Armed Forces Medical Research conference and wish the members
all success in thier research missions.
Restoration of Car Nicobar
T AM INDEED delighted to be with you in this beautiful environment.
My greetings to all Officers, Warrant Officers and Airmen of Air
Force Station, Car Nicobar. I have been closely monitoring the status
of this Air Force Station during the Tsunami devastation on 26th
Dec.2004.1 was shocked to know that valuable lives of 116 officers,
men, support employees and families posted in this station were lost
due to the fury of the nature. I pray to the Almighty to give strength
to bear the loss to those who lost their kith and kin during this
devastation. Inspite of the traumatic situation, Wing Commander BSK
Kumar with his co-pilot and technical staff flew number of sorties,
winched-up people through hovering at very low altitude and saved
over 350 lives. I also understand a 13 year old girl Meghna Rajasekhar
lost her father, mother and brother and was brought to the Air Force
Station after a lapse of 48 hours by the tribals from Kakana village.
She is now living with her grandparents at Secunderabad. Due to
Tsunami the area of the Air Force Station has shrunk from 500 acres
to 350 acres. I am sure very soon the Air Force Station will be able to
get the additional 150 acres for bringing the Station to its original
state. Now in record time the Car Nicobar runway has been restored
to it original position, in which any type of aircraft can land. My
congratulations to the construction engineers and the Air Force team
for realizing this mission.
The Government is well aware of hardships being faced by our
defence personnel deployed in these areas. We are making all out efforts
to improve the quality of life our Air Force personnel operating in such
far flung areas. Presently, due to non-availability of certain infrastructure
like schools and colleges, this station has been declared as a non-family
station. Very soon, I am sure adequate infrastructure and facilities will
Address at the Air Force Station, Car Nicobar, 7 May 2005
come up and we will be able to revert back to its earlier status.
Reconstruction of Houses and other facilities have been undertaken
with a new design which is capable of withstanding any type of natural
fury. Meanwhile, apart from providing opportunity to speak to your
families, efforts to send more men on leave by air are some of the
measures being taken to improve the quality of life.
I would like to assure you that the entire Nation is with you in this
honourable duty. We are all very proud of the our Air Force and its
Finally, I wish you all the very best and may you all succeed in all
your future missions. I also take this opportunity to greet your families.
Activity index curve, 220, 221

An oath for the youth, 10
Ayurveda research, 364, 366
BAIF model, 93,94, 97, 170, 171, 197,
Bandwidth as an infrastructure, 599
Basic amenities, 20, 60
Bharat Nirman, 72, 246, 247
Bio-fuel, 40, 89, 110, 114, 181, 184,
200, 253, 265, 496, 547, 649,
Diesel, 110, 114, 181, 189, 199,
200, 253, 266, 483, 547, 675 Diversity, 263
Jatropha 181, 188, 199
BRAHMOS, 7, 399, 574
Broad goals of Bharat Nirman, 247
Business Process Outsourcing (BPOs),

Cancer, 309, 329, 373, 615
Central Leather Research Institute
CNT (Carbon Nano Tubes), 119, 549,
CAG, 236, 238, 240, 243
CARE Hospitals, 282, 335
Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research (CSIR), 327, 357
Cape Town, 402, 427, 452
Cardiac care, 281, 313
Cardiology and Cardiovascular Centre,

Effective Project Director, 219
Chemotherapy, 310, 374, 375
Civilizational heritage, 390, 411, 458,

Cochlear Implant, 340, 341, 342, 344,

Common Minimum Programme, 176,

Competitiveness, 157, 177, 190, 202,
205, 226, 229, 267, 317, 318,
Computer Aided Design, 211,212
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD),

Conclave, 668, 672, 678
Connectivity, 164, 174, 205, 210, 214,
230, 384, 407, 450, 468, 471,
472, 518, 519, 551, 617, 636,
640, 647, 650, 673, 678
Electronic, 636, 649, 650, 673,

Creative leader, 185,214,227,267, 527
Creativity, 33, 78, 388, 389, 442, 616,
Culture, 205 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Dan David Prize, 566
Deendayal Research Institute (DRI),

Defect-free vision for all, 338
De-oiled cake, 40, 109, 114, 181, 189,
254, 266, 483, 496, 547
Department of Science and Technology
Design of contra-rotating propeller, 512
Design intervention techniques, 209
Digital-Fly-by- Wire Control System
Digital library, 22, 26, 379, 381, 382,
383, 387, 602, 604, 623
Storage and dissemination, 27,
Drudgery reduction and health care, 171
Dry Fand Farming, 198
Dynamics of Development, 156
Education, 17, 22, 441
System, 16, 38, 45, 59
Education for Dignity of Eluman life, 38
Electricity Generation, 182, 190, 200
Employment Guarantee Bill, 230, 243,

International (EMPI), 74, 78, 79
Environmental cleanliness, 8, 630
Equalization of opportunity, 294
Essential Connectivities through PURA,

External Counter Pulsation (ECP), 314,
EXIM bank, 668, 670
EDUSAT, 24, 58, 434, 435
ERNET, 130 Features of programme management,

Five national missions, 261, 429
Fly ash, 42 and 255
Flying Eye Hospital (FEH), 300
Forum for Health Research (Forum-9),
FRO (Floor Reaction Orthosis), 278,
Gene Chip, 287, 297, 561
Global security environment, 15
Government to Citizen (G2C), 241
Government to Government (G2G), 241
Green buildings, 118, 121, 123
Revolution, 186, 193, 473, 672
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), 38,
230, 231, 246, 260, 428, 470,
616, 637, 647, 671
Giant Metre-wave Radio Telescope
Health care study, 420, 416

Garden, 516 Farms, 89
Hind Kusht Nivaran Sangh, 304, 306
Holistic lifestyle intervention, 273, 315
Homi Jehangir Bhabha, 466
Human disorders, 331, 362
Hymn to Buddha, 666
Heavy Alloy Penetration Plant (HAPP),

HIV, 328, 332, 352, 359, 676
Income generation activities, 271
India-Post, 23, 29, 71
Inflation, 53, 54 Infrastructure, 60, 183
Innovation, 33, 34, 76,434, 662
Innovative Capacity Index, 31
Institute of Chartered Accountants of
India (1CAI), 228, 229, 231
Vision of ICAI, 175, 204, 234
Integrated action, 406, 428, 616
Integrated Guided Missile Development
programme, 169 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Internet kiosks, 91, 92, 169, 174, 211,
Iron Bird test, 224, and 225
ICT, 158, 188, 202, 264, 285, 296
IGNOU, 434, 435, 436, 437, 440
Jetropha plantation technology and
Kali Bein rivulet, 172, 621, 630
Kisan Call centre, 264, 646, 647
Kith and kin, 653
Knowledge, 379, 380, 429, 434, 445,
469, 479, 602, 661,677
Society, 379, 380, 429, 430, 433,
Kolkata Press Club, 628, 634, 635
Lalit Kala Akademi, 388, 391
Laws of Aerodynamics, 461
Law of development, 177, 206
Leadership in Pharma Industry, 317
Leprosy, 303, 304, 305, 306
Lions Club, 334, 336, 337, 369
Look East Policy, 69
Lord Kelvin, 444, 461
LED, 182, 189, 200, 529
Major eye care hospitals, 336
Mapping the Neighbourhood, 608
Medical Insurance Scheme, 272
Mission of scientific community, 544
Mobile Legal Services, 133
Clinic, 325, 356, 366
Moral leadership, 495, 663
Multiple Drug Therapy (MDT), 305,

Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, 654, 670
MIS, 241 MTS, 209
Namakku namae project, 173
Nanotechnology, 180, 320, 337, 346
Programme, 54, 55, 66
National Hydrographic Office, 505,
National Innovation Foundation (NIF),
31, 34, 35, 78, 631
National Institute of Design (NID),
National Integration Council, 66
National Programme for the Control of
National Rural Employment Guarantee
Neurological disorder Nano powder,

New Deal for Rural India, 54, 56, 72
Nodal PURA Knowledge Data centres,

Novel detection kit, 562
NIMHANS, 346, 347, 352, 353
Oath for enlightened citizenship, 432,

Open heart surgery, 283
ORBIS, 300, 301, 302
Parkinson disease, 274, 283, 346, 549
Passenger Jet Aircraft, 597
Physical Research Laboratory (PRL),

Post Office, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28
Prof. Vikram Sarabhai, 466
Programme Management Board, 218
PURA, 3, 24, 25, 39, 45, 72, 76, 84,
91, 92, 96, 105, 123, 139, 158,
160, 164, 165, 184, 196, 197,
210, 211, 230, 243, 246, 250,
256, 261, 264, 407, 476, 518,
552, 672, 673, 674, 677, 616,
618, 624, 631, 638, 645, 647
As an Enterprise, 408
Cluster, 169, 179 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Raman Effect, 464, 555, 556, 663
Ranbaxy Research Foundation, 287
Revised National Tuberculosis Control
Right to Information Act, 67, 148
Righteousness, 11, 145, 203, 659
Root cause of poverty, 15
Rotary International, 277, 279
Rural development model, 24
Lighting, 182, 189, 200
Sangeet Natak Akademi, 457, 459
Satellite remote sensing, 574
Section 80-1 B, 272
Self-Help Groups, 93, 169, 196, 250,
Shaitan (devil), 276, 286
Sickle cell disease, 288, 330, 360, 361,

Siruthuli, 171, 198, 617
Small-scale industries, 159, 184, 196,

Societal Grid, 599, 647, 677
Special capacity needs, 663
Sphincter to control the flow of thought,

Subsonic cruise missiles, 398
Technology, 8, 22, 158, 183, 187, 206,
318,449,495, 523, 550, 662, 663
Technological challenges, 579, 587
Technological change, 23 Tele-education, 519
Tele-education delivery system, 436
Ten dimensional transformations, 5
Textile industry, 42, 498, 620, 632
The Moon, 540, 541
The Tsunami, 45, 50, 68, 213,430,431
Thomas Alva Edison, 442
Three components for education, 437
Three dimensional actions, 9
Three Light Combat Aircraft, 215
Traditional System storage, 605
Traditional systems of medicines, 273
Transparent society, 129, 142
Two Years for the Weavers, 63
Uncommon Opportunities, 193, 203
Unequal access to educational
United Progressive Alliance (UPA), 51
University of Madras, 660

Various forms of disasters, 213
Village Knowledge Centre, 645, 646
Village Panchayats, 26, 44, 94
Vision of developed India, 6
Vision 2020: The Right to Sight, 334,

Voting - a Sacred Mission, 12
Equality of every citizen, 12
Virtual art gallery, 396
University, 438, 478, 479, 638,
VR,207 APJ ABDUL KALAM : SELECTED SPEECHES
Waste Land Development, 198

World Bank, 168, 175
World is Flat, 633
World Travel and Tourism Council
Zanzibar, 656, 657, 658
The present volume is a compilation
of the speeches of Dr. APJ Abdul
Kalam, the 11th President of India.
His speeches during January, 2004
upto December, 2005 lay emphasis
on education as the most important
element of growth and prosperity of a
nation. This he feels could be achieved
only through an education system
which focuses on inculcating high
moral values among the citizens
and creating productive employment
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING

Iamdelighted toparticipate intheinauguration ofthe
General Assembly oftheInternational UnionofRadio
educationists, technologists, anddistinguished participants,
especially delegates coming fromvariouspartsofthe
envisaged byMaxwell, J.C.Bose,andMarconi abouta
scientists, particularly youngscientists, tointeractwith
international experts onstate-of-the-art subjects. Ihave
ofdifferent disciplines connected withtheelectromagnetic
spectrum, belonging toIndiaanddifferent countries
international cooperation. Therocketandpayload were
integrated intheThumba Equatorial RocketLaunching
October23,2005, hepresented thefollowing addressatthe
Opening Ceremony oftheXXVIIIth GeneralAssembly of
TheRadioScienceBulletin No317(June,2006)experiment pavedthewayformanysounding rocket
scientifIc community fortheuniqueexperiments inthe
Thumba wasmyfIrstexperience with radiopropagation
thefounder forthePhysical Research Laboratory at
Vikram Sarabhai, whoworkedonexperimental cosmic
coldcompact objects, likeplanets. Apartfromtheir
scientifIc andtechnological institutions tonurtureandgrow
program, through itssounding-rocket program and
geosynchronous-satellite program, iscontributing toIndia's
linkbetween Trivandrum andMumbai foronward

communication linkbetween Hyderabad andChandipur,
mainland, Balasore, SHAR,downrange ships,andCar
Thesecommunication facilities mademeunderstand the
roleofscientists andengineers inrealizing thesesystems
Recently, Iparticipated intheawardceremony of
Shankar's International Children's Competition atNew
civilization, whichwasmanmade, comessuddenly under
nuclearcannons toattacktheoncoming asteroid. The
aninnovative scientific application. Whatawonderful
standardized technique forcombating asteroids, whichmay
willberequired tobe sentwithhigh-energy material
(GMRT). TheTataInstitute ofFundamental Research
countryanditsvaluable civilization's heritage. Indiahas
earthquake problems periodically incertainregions.
Anearthquake isasubterranean phenomenon, and
challenge. Anearthquake phenomenon inabroadersense
although theseprecursors generating thepre-rupture stage
calledpre-slip, envisaged inthedynamic modelsofthe
earthquake source,isalsoagoodtheoretical possibility, but
itsobservation appears difficult. Precise geodetic
According tonewconcepts, earthquakes occurwhen
onthepre-slips. Atmospheric/ionospheric anomalies still
definitely bekeentoestablish thecorrelation betweenthe
Itisimportant tomention andacknowledge the
amateur-radio expedition wasinAndaman andwas
operational duringthedisaster, andprovided vital
communications tothemainland andIndonesia forgetting
andhospitals byvoluntary agencies whowillbeableto
liketoremember fondlythesignificant contribution ofthe
toimprove thereliability ofcommunication. Hamswork
TheRadioScienceBulletin No317(June,2006)alotofscopetoimprove narrowband communication
techniques, multi-hop HFcommunication toremoteareas
community candefinitely assistthehamoperators through
research inestablishing low-cost narrowband
technology. Thetechnological challenges are:
Earth'sdynamic atmosphere prevents theuseoflasersfor

suggestions tothisscientific community, whichwillbe
forimproving theeducational standards ofourrural
communication specialists havetoworktogether to
makehigh-bandwidth seamless connectivity forthe
science community tomankind towards disaster
(5)Iunderstand thatadaptive radioandsoftware radioare
technologies. Inthisconnection, itisessential forthe
bandwidth communication inthewirelessspectrum in
(6)Radioscientists andtechnologists shouldcontinue to
spectrum needsevolution ofanallocation criteria.
decades. Becauseofitspotential fortransmitting large
Research isessential tofindouttherelationship of
transmitting frequency withatmospheric structure.
disastermitigation, earthquake forecasting, andasolution
research inpromoting economic prosperity totheplanet
toalltheparticipants oftheGeneral Assembly of